
--- Page 1 ---
   
 
1 
 
RAMMP: Robotic Assistive Mobility and Manipulation Platform Providing Independence 
for People with Disabilities 
Full Proposal 
 
BAA Number: 75N99223S0001 
(1) BAA Number: 75N99223S0001 
(2) Technical area: Proactive Health 
(3) Lead Organization submitting the proposal: University of Pittsburgh 
(4) Type of Organization: OTHER EDUCATIONAL 
(5) Proposer’s reference number (if any): A0847 
(6) Other team members and type of organization for each: 
a. Northeastern University, OTHER EDUCATIONAL 
b. Carnegie Mellon University, OTHER EDUCATIONAL 
c. Cornell University, OTHER EDUCATIONAL 
d. Purdue, OTHER EDUCATIONAL 
e. ATDev, OTHER SMALL BUSINESS 
f. Kinova, OTHER SMALL BUSINESS 
g. LUCI, OTHER SMALL BUSINESS 
 
(7) Proposal title: RAMMP: Robotic Assistive Mobility and Manipulation Platform Providing 
Independence for People with Disabilities 
(8) Technical point of contact to include: Dr. Cooper, Rory, 6425 Penn Ave, Suite 400, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 15206, 412-822-3700, rcooper@pitt.edu 
(9) Administrative point of contact to include: Jennifer E. Woodward, PhD, 300 MURD, 4320 
Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, 412-624-7400, fedcon@pitt.edu 
(10) Total funds requested from ARPA-H, and the amount of cost share (if any): 
Funds: $41,710,215. Cost-share: $7,267,144 
(11) Date proposal was submitted: April 4, 2024 
(12) Keywords: Assistive Technology, Medical Devices, AI/ML, Robotics 

--- Page 2 ---
   
 
2 
 
Section II - Summary of Proposal 
S2 - A - Technical Rationale & Approach  
This project proposes the creation of the  
revolutionary robotic assisted mobility and 
manipulation platform  (RAMMP), see Figure  
1, enabled through an open- source Assistive 
Technology (AT) Operating System (ATOS).  
ATOS will offer an expandable software 
package tailored to AT developer and user 
needs. Through collaboration between industry 
and academia, we aim to develop a versatile, 
robust system that will serve as a 
groundbreaking research and education tool 
and as a foundation for commercial 
applications, revolutionizing the field of AT. 
The project introduces Robotic Assistive Mobility & Manipulation Simulation ( RAMMS), a 
digital twin virtual  environment. This innovative tool will enable precise virtual testing and 
development of the RA MMP system within a controlled, simulated world that mirrors real- life 
conditions. By facilitating safe, scalable, and efficient experimentation to accelerate research and 
development (R&D), RAMMS, will be an expandable and adaptable tool which will pave the way 
for advanced, reliable solutions that can be adapted to a wide range of needs and environments, 
thereby revolutionizing the approach to AT R&D and deployment. The RAMMP project will 
engage students in courses, internships, and R&D  and evaluate experiences to ensure that the 
platform gains traction as a R&D  and education tool. This aligns with ARPA -H's mission to 
accelerate the development and adoption of cutting- edge health innovations, ensuring 
advancements in AT reach people who need them  fostering greater independence and quality of 
life. Developing solutions requires  engaging stakeholders to ensure the appropriate needs and 
preferences are met and that the ap propriate challenges are being addressed.  The project will 
produce valuable usage data across essential domains including transportation, eating & drinking, 
shopping, work, and participation. Traditional manual teleoperation poses a significant barrier to 
independence due to its limited abilities, time consumption, and heightened mental and physical 
fatigue compared to semi -autonomous control . Tasks that require coordinated control of the 
assistive rob otic manipulator ( ARM) and powered mobility device (PMD) such as opening a 
refrigerator door and removing an item are extremely difficult and time -consuming and still 
impossible for most people with current technology. U sers have difficulties driving over uneven 
terrains or overcoming architectural barriers such as curbs, curb -cuts, and unstructured 
environments. The most common wheelchair-related accidents in such environments were tips and 
falls [1, 2]  due to loss of traction (slip), getting stuck (immobilized), loss of stability [3], or 
overlooked surfaces [2, 4] . As a result of these accidents, more than 100,000 wheelchair -related 
injuries are treated in emergency departments in the US every year [3]. Research has demonstrated 
that users adapted their behavior by choosing accessible routes [5]; hence restricting community 
participation. We will promote change through embracing the Participatory Action Design and 
Engineering (PADE) process to include leveraging the experiences of our team members who use 
  
Figure 1. Conceptual drawing of RAMMP. 


--- Page 3 ---
   
 
3 
 
PMD in their daily lives, the program will also leverage multiple different user networks across 
the country. User engagement will range  from engineers/scientists on our team, focus groups, 
journey mapping, controlled lab testing, usability testing, and controlled real -world testing. 
Stakeholder engagement will be a collaborative partnership among clinicians, end -users, 
universities, and industry partners.  
S2 - B – Innovation of Proposed Research  
This project represents a transformative leap forward in AT, aiming to revolutionize the mobility 
and manipulation (M&M) capabilities for people with disabilities (PWD). Current powered 
mobility and manipulation devices (PMMD) are based on antiquated technology that forces PWD 
to rely heavily on the assistance of other people (availability of this assistance is very limited, often 
unreliable, and shrinking), severely restrict the environments of PWD (often to only a portion of a 
person’s home), and present large barriers to the freedom, empowerment, and health that most 
people enjoy, and technology could provide. Current PMMD limits the ability of PWD to exercise 
their rights to safely and freely move about their homes, neighborhoods, and communities  when 
and where they please, to enjoy a snack or meal when they please at home or in their communities 
alone or with others in a safe and dignified manner , and to participate in many of life’s basi c 
activities such a shopping, school, work, or leisure  with spontaneity when and as they choose . 
Today, the lives of many PWD are highly regimented with little autonomy with RAMMP, and the 
R&D community we intend to create PWD will have the ability for vastly greater autonomy and 
quality of life. The RAMMP innovation is a comprehensive robotic M&M platform designed to 
empower PWD to  perform activities of daily living (ADL) with unparalleled control and 
independence. By leveraging cutting-edge technology, RAMMP will offer users a powerful robotic 
M&M device enabling PWD  to navigate and manipulate objects within their environment 
effectively with confidence and safety. Crucially, our solution goes beyond conventional designs 
by providing real -time, 360° environmental awareness, empowering users with c omplete 
situational awareness and enhancing safety and confidence.  In addition to its technological 
advancements, RAMMP offers significant benefits for rehabilitation, robotics, and mechatronics 
education. By making powerful platforms accessible for R&D, education, and start-up companies, 
we will accelerate innovation and skill development in the field. This democratization of access to 
cutting-edge technology will inspire the next generation of innovators and entrepreneurs in robotic 
M&M and AT and provide unprecedented freedom to PWD . In summary, our proposed R&D  
represents a paradigm shift in AT, offering a holistic and user -centric approach to robotic M&M 
that will empower PWD to live more independently, safely, and confidently in their daily lives. 
S2 - C – Deliverables, Plans and Capabilities for Technology Transition 
The deliverables associated with the proposed project will be completed in 4 phases throughout a 
5-year plan. Phase 1: Preliminary Design Features, Phase 2: Proof – of - Product, Phase 3: Efficacy 
and Effectiveness E valuation, and Phase 4:  Integration and Documentation , see Figure 2. 
Milestones and deliverables are illustrated in Figures 2 & 3. Proprietary Claims and Intellectual 
Property (IP): Team members have existing IP  that will be built upon during this project. 
Agreements will be executed for sharing IP within the team, and licenses will be executed prior to 
bringing IP to market. P itt has an existing IP related to the mobility base that is intended to be 
licensed to ATDev during this project. ATDev has an IP relevant to the seating system, which will 

--- Page 4 ---
   
 
4 
 
benefit this project. 
LUCI has proprietary 
hardware and software to 
benefit this project  for 
mobility platform 
negotiation and 
navigation. Kinova has 
IP for their current ARM 
and interface, which will 
benefit the ma nipulation 
activities. Together this 
IP and the scientific basis 
provided by our team 
create the foundation for 
this project.  Plans for 
Technology Transition 
and Commercialization: 
The team’s commercial 
partners intend to bring aspects of the project to the market. LUCI  will incorporate the findings 
related to assisted navigation and negotiation into new releases of their products. Kinova will 
incorporate advancements into their ARM and user interfaces in future releases. ATDev plans to 
release ATOS as an open -source product. ATDev intends to bring the RAMMP hardware 
technologies to market for R&D  and education purposes and to apply the knowledge and 
technology advancements to launch a Medicare Group -3 PMD with advanced features. There is 
likely to be additional IP developed for which we will file through the lead inventor’s organization 
with all significant contributors listed as inventors. This IP will be offered to commercial partner  
team members to license and to other companies who express an interest.  
S2 - D - General Discussion of Other Research  
This project aims to develop a next-generation AT platform that will conquer end-user challenges 
to perform more ADL independently. The identified ADL represent challenging tasks which -  if 
solved - will provide a leap forward in the quality of life for users of PMD and would potentially 
allow users to go through their day with greater freedom and independence. Robotic systems have 
emerged as an engineering solution to ameliorate safety concerns and improve instrumental ADL. 
Such PMD like the RT -Mover [6], iBOT3000 [7] , TopChair [8], and MEBot [9] can maintain 
stability on uneven terrains and negotiate steps. These PMD prototypes require a large footprint 
resulting in limited turning radii and poor maneuverability for indoor use. S tability is limited in 
the pitch direction which puts users at risk of tipping sideways on cross -slopes. PMMD-mounted 
ARM provides options for manipulation- specific self -care ADL and IADL. There are several 
commercially available general -purpose ARM, for example  MANUS/iARM (Exact Dynamics, 
Netherlands), JACO/MICO, and Gen2/Gen3 Ultra lightweight robotic manipulator  (Kinova 
Robotics, Canada). Most ARM can be controlled by a joystick, keypad, switch, voice-based UI, or 
head array. Various interfaces were developed to enhance ARM performance. Home and 
community studies revealed that cognitive load and frustration with increasing operation time are 
 
Figure 2. RAMMP “V” Diagram. 


--- Page 5 ---
   
 
5 
 
the most significant barriers and limitations to be overcome for ARM to assist with many 
functional ADL effectively and efficiently. Technological improvements thus far are not reliable 
and robust in many real-life environments  and of limited usability . Although studies with 
integrated autonomy through object recognition demonstrated reduced completion time in specific 
tasks, transparent and effective communication between the PMMD  and ARM is necessary to 
improve function [10]. Solving these PMMD limitations requires new technological advancements 
and an entirely new approach that is too complex for one organization to solve alone. 
S2 - E - Teaming Strategy and Organizational Chart Teaming Strategy. 
Our convergence team includes specialists in personal robotics, regulatory compliance, quality 
assurance and testing, medical device productization, artificial intelligence, AT, and human factors 
engineers of assistive robotics. To ensure the success of the project and effective collaboration 
among team members, the strategy in Figure 3 will be implemente d to ensur e coordination, 
completion, and alignment of efforts. Oversight, coordination, and decision-making processes will 
involve a project management board consisting of team leaders, bold and underlined in Figure 3.  
Monthly meetings of the management board will facilitate collaboration and information sharing. 
There will be  monthly progress reviews and resources may be reallocated based on progress 
against quarterly milestones. The Chief of Staff will meet with Thrust Leaders weekly.  Thrust 
leads are Pitt ( PACE, PEAR, SUITE), ATD ev (ATOS, PLUM), Kinova (ARM), CMU and NEU 
(RAMMS). Convergence Team collaboration between researchers, engineers, educators, students, 
clinicians, and end-users will ensure that the final product s meet the needs of target populations . 
The management board and leadership team will establish transparent communication channels 
with regular updates, progress reports, and feedback sessions. The following project criteria will 
be used: Does activity  leverage adoption across project systems; Does activity  help to answer a 
core research question or design problem; Does activity add to understanding of barriers to scaling 
the impact; Does activity integrate expertise across technical and health fields; Does activity make 
effective use of team’s expertise and resources?  Team members will provide mutual support and 
resource sharing to overcome challenges and capitalize on opportunities. This includes sharing 
 
Figure 3. RAMMP Project Team Organizational Chart 


--- Page 6 ---
   
 
6 
 
data, expertise, and access to specialized facilities or equipment as needed. The project will adopt 
a user -centered PADE approach, with a focus on understanding the needs and preferences of 
stakeholders. Feedback from users will be integrated iteratively throughout the development 
process to ensure that the final product exceeds expectations, see Figure 2 and subsequent sections. 
Quality assurance and regulatory compliance will be integral parts of the project, see Figure 2, and 
later sections. 
Section III - Detailed Proposal Information 
S3 - B - Results, Products, Transferable Technology, and Technology Transfer Path 
Intended Results: The development of the RAMMP will encompass a R&D  and education 
platform. The project will develop RAMM S – a RAMMP d igital twin, providing a software 
simulation connected to real-world data and hardware components. This digital twin will facilitate 
comprehensive testing, development, and optimization of the RAMMP platform in virtual 
environments, contributing to continued advancement and efficacy. The ATOS will offer an open-
source, expandable software package tailored to AT developer and user needs. These products 
represent significant advancements in the field of AT, offering innovative solutions to provide 
freedom and independence for PWD. By combining cutting- edge technology with user -engaged 
PADE principles, the project will develop products to transform the lives of PWD and accelerate 
innovation from academia and industry. Through extensive stakeholder  needs identification 
efforts, the team will gain and disseminate valuable insights into requirements and preferences, 
informing the design and functional ity of RAMMP. Expert user data will be collected and 
analyzed, focusing on function, usability, and features to ensure RAMMP  effectiveness. The 
culmination of these efforts will lead to the creation of a comprehensive RAMMP design package, 
detailing the specifications and components of the platform. The project will produce usage data 
across various domains including transportation, eating & drinking, shopping, work, education, 
and participation. These data will serve to evaluate the performance and impact of RAMMP and 
form a foundation for further R&D  using real-world scenarios, providing valuable guidance for 
optimization. The RAMMP project will engage students in courses, internships, and research and 
evaluate their experiences to ensure that the platform gains traction as a R&D and education tool. 
The criteria to be used to assess education and outreach goals include: Does activity incorporate 
best practices in teaching and learning; Is it sustainable beyond the project’s lifetime; Does activity 
improve STEM inclusion for underrepresented groups; Does it involve integrative learning across 
disciplines; Will it synergize with/inform our R&D; Is the activity effective in achieving 
learning/training goals? This data will be used to guide the RAMMP project and build a community 
to transform the industry. The project will facilitate collaboration between researchers, engineers, 
and stakeholders, fostering a convergence team approach to addres s M&M challenges. This 
convergence effort will enrich the process, ensuring that RAMMP meets the diverse needs of its 
stakeholders while incorporating cutting- edge technological advancements to leap the field 
forward. The results of this project will underscore the importance of user -engaged PADE and 
convergence team collaboration in the development of AT. By prioritizing user needs and 
leveraging expertise from essential disciplines, the project will succeed in creating a sophisticated 
platform that promises to enhance M&M and independence for PWD  through growing a 
community of innovators and researchers. Products: The RAMMP will feature a novel robotic 
base advancing the Mobility Enhancement Robotic Wheelchair (MEBot), an integrated 

--- Page 7 ---
   
 
7 
 
transformed Kinova ARM, and an enhanced LUCI package, along with electronic, software 
interfaces for additional sensor and user interface integration, and a new open- source operating 
system - ATOS. ATDev intends to bring RAMMP to market as a R&D and education product and 
will exercise a license with Pitt for the patented and patent pending MEBot IP. ATDev will make 
a commercial robotic PMD  intended for provision to consumers relying on the knowledge and 
technology resulting from this project. The project wi ll focus on enhancing specific components 
such as the LUCI package and Kinova ARM. The advanced LUCI product will incorporate 
advanced obstacle detection and classification capabilities, obstacle negotiation and avoidance 
strategies as task demands, path planning, and autonomous features. The enhanced Kinova ARM 
will introduce a transformative new end-effector, lift arm, lift arm, and a more adaptable interface 
for broader use applications . Transferable Technology, and Technology Transfer Path : 
Companies and universities involved in the project will retain ownership of their existing IP. Any 
confidential or proprietary information shared among partners will be clearly identified and 
safeguarded through non -disclosure agreements. License agreements will be established for the 
commercialization of new or existing IP. The new IP resulting from this project will adhere to the 
guidelines set forth by the US Patent and Trademark Office. All individuals contributing essential 
aspects to the creation of IP will be inventors. Respective organizations employing these inventors 
may assert rights as per their internal policies and procedures. Negotiations for royalty  
distributions on new or existing IP will be conducted by designated technology management 
officers from each participating organization. Some technologies developed through the project, 
such as ATOS, are intended for open- source distribution or made available under royalty- free 
licenses. All stakeholders engaged in creating such IP will establish a working agreement. ATDev 
plans to use their own funding to use RAMMP as a springboard into developing a Group 3 PMD 
which they will bring to market during or after the program period. Alongside this PMD , ATDev 
 
Figure 4. Delineation of thrusts/workstreams 


--- Page 8 ---
   
 
8 
 
plans to continue the development of their current lower -limb exoskeleton – the Reflex – by 
incorporating ATOS into it. ATDev plans to provide manufacturing and support contracts for the 
open-source RAMMP R&D  platform, should researchers or other industry partners choose to 
purchase instead of building themselves. ATDev plans to contribute to the maintenance and 
development of the ATOS and RAMMS software in the open-source community. 
S3 - C – Detailed Technical Approach 
Delineation of subsystems/workstreams to be developed are  described in Figure 4. RAMMP 
denotes both the overarching project and the comprehensive robotic M&M platform. 
S3 – C – Phase 1: Preliminary Design Features 
Stakeholder engagement, facilitated through the PADE  process, will encompass focus groups, 
journey mapping interviews, and expert user evaluations  conducted by team members. These 
endeavors will foster partnerships among stakeholders , academic institutions, and industry.  
University students pursuing engineering, computer science, or rehabilitation-related professions, 
wheelchair users, rehabilitation engineers, therapists,  and AT professionals (ATP) specializing in 
wheelchair service and delivery, and wheelchair manufacturers  will serve as the foundation for 
user engagement. Leveraging the ir collective expertise, we will develop solutions through 
RAMMP facilitating the resolution of hereto for intransigent ADL challenges. Stakeholder Needs 
Identification: The elucidation of stakeholder requisites and challenges in the execution of ADL 
tasks is fundamental for validating and enhancing RAMMP design specifications and 
functionalities. To this end, we will convene focus groups comprising a total of 25 stakeholders, 
aged 18 years or older. Participants will engage in discussions about  utilization of current M&M 
AT, primary requirements, existing obstacles encountered during various ADL, and desired M&M 
features that could expand functionality, alongside identifying research and education lacunae. 
ADL selected for scrutiny, encompassing augmented mobility, transportation, meal -related 
activities (including eating/drinking and clean-up), shopping, work, and community engagement, 
have been discerned through review ing the literature. Subsequently, a thematic analysis will be 
conducted to ascertain prevalent ADL challenges and pinpoint R&D and education gaps, 
facilitating translation of findings into design prerequisites, specifications, and capabilities for 
RAMMP system. Journey mapping interviews will be conducted with 25 stakeholders representing 
diverse perspectives and expertise. Our stakeholder consortium, inclusive of university students 
pursuing engineering, computer science, or rehabilitation professions, PMD  users, rehabilitation 
engineers, therapists, and ATP specializing in PMD  service and delivery, as well as PMD  
manufacturers, will ensure comprehensive representation. Through journey mapping interviews, 
stakeholders will delineate experiences and challenges encountered throughout the entirety of their 
ADL routines. This approach will provide insights into the nuances of interactions with M&M AT, 
enriching understanding of stakeholder  needs and informing the refinement of RAMMP design 
requirements and capabilities.  Refine System Requirements: The requirements for RAMMP 
systems will be derived from data obtained through f ocus groups and j ourney mapping. These 
methodologies will offer insights into more precise system specifications. Key criteria include 
ensuring that the overall mass of the system will be below 75 kilograms, the utilization of state -
of-the-art brushless DC motors , and advanced battery technologies, coupled with cutting- edge 
power management techniques. The RAMMP system must exhibit a range exceeding 16 
kilometers per charge and incorporate power seat functionalities such as tilt (forward, rearward, 

--- Page 9 ---
   
 
9 
 
and lateral), recline, elevation, and leg- rest elevation. M ultiple input/output ports for interface 
devices will be integrated, alongside an expandable sensor package for enhanced environmental 
awareness leveraging the open- source expandable ATOS and capabilities of LUCI . The overall 
width, length, and seat height of the system must be smaller than current Group 3 PMD to ensure 
maneuverability. The system will feature obstacle identification, classification, navigation, and 
negotiation capabilities  to include ramps, curbs , drop- offs, pathway edges/transitions, surface 
types, and common architectural features (e.g., doors, hallways, thresholds). RAMMS will be a 
digital twin, incorporating real -world data from the RAMMP hardware and equipped with 
troubleshooting and predictive capabilities, which will augment hardware system performance and 
reliability. RAMMS digital twin will provide the ability to simulate and predict performance 
improvements prior to building physical hardware. These requirements will serve as the foundation 
for the development of RAMMP systems tailored to meet the diverse needs of stakeholders.  
Performance and F unctional Metrics: Performance and functional metrics will undergo 
refinement to assess RAMMP and measure improvements when developing platforms to enhance 
education, expand entrepreneurship, and improve ADL completion. These specific measures will 
be adjusted as necessary in response to emerging scientific and engineering discoveries, input from 
focus groups, and insights from journey mapping results. Drawing upon prior relevant experience 
and published literature, an initial set of evaluation tools was  chosen, including the NASA-TLX, 
USAT, RESNA Standards, Power -mobility Indoor Driving Assessment, Power Mobility 
Community Driving Assessment, Fitt’s Law, Jebsen Hand Test, Block and Box Test, Minnesota 
Rate of Manipulation Test, Environmental Analysis of Mobility Questionnaire, Patient Global 
Impression of Change  (PGIMC), and Psychosocial Impact of Assistive Devices Scale. [11]  
[PITT.27] Assessment protocol will be employed for device testing with stakeholders during Phase 
3. Tasks for Activities of Daily Living: Tasks for ADL encompass a spectrum of essential activities 
crucial for independent living, spanning from basic self -care routines to community engagement. 
Priority ADL tasks are slated for refinement to enhance the performance of the RAMMP, to ensure 
measurable advancements in functionality. Tasks will include activities such as ingress/egress and 
vehicle docking, meal preparation, eating/drinking, and clean-up, shopping across various domains 
like grocery and clothing stores, engaging in work settings such as offices, laboratories, retail 
outlets, and outdoor work environments, pursuing educational endeavors in classroom s, and 
laboratories, participating in community activities including travel, leisure pursuits, sports, and 
recreation. The scope extends to indoor navigation challenges encompassing maneuvering through 
hallways, doors, bathrooms, kitchens, and bedrooms, as well as tackling outdoor negotiation 
hurdles such as ramps, curbs, irregular pedestrian pathways, potholes, cross-slopes, gravel, grass, 
and speedbumps. By focusing on refining these priority ADL tasks, RAMMP aims to expand R&D 
capacity, increase innovation, and enhance independence and quality of life for PWD  navigating 
through diverse environments, fostering vast  improvements in daily functioning. The success of 
RAMMP will be measured by either providing the ability to perform tasks incapable with current 
PMMD or that exceed current capabilities (e.g., 4X better on tasks). Design Feature Refinement: 
Design features of RAMMP will undergo an iterative refinement process aimed at enhancing 
RAMMP's functionality and usability. Subsequent design features will be honed by integrating 
feedback from expert user testing, Clinical Limits of Use Testing (CLOUT) , RESNA Standards 
Testing, as well as efficacy and effectiveness testing  to ensure that RAMMP meet s the diverse 

--- Page 10 ---
   
 
10 
 
needs of stakeholders while adhering to safety standards and efficacy benchmarks. Through this 
iterative refinement process, RAMMP aims to optimize its design features to enhance  education, 
product innovation, and M&M outcomes, ultimately fostering vastly  greater independence and 
quality of life for PWD. 
S3 – C – Phase 2: Design and Proof of Concept 
Virtual Twin and Simulation Framework : CMU and NEU will co-lead developing the digital 
twin simulation environment and its associated infrastructure  - RAMMS. The RAMMS platform 
will be constructed on a foundation supporting realistic rendering and physical simulation of 
intricate interactions among complex rigid -body and soft -body systems within environmental 
contexts. Utilizing Unreal Engine 5 as its backbone, the RAMMS will incorporate extensions for 
custom physical simulation, seamless integration with bespoke components, and deployment as a 
versatile platform for RAMM P simulation, synthetic data generation, and real -world data input. 
Within RAMMS, a suite of software components will be embedded to facilitate a spectrum of 
functionalities, including simulated sensor management, configuration, and fusion, alongside 
environmental representation, experiment management, data integration, and collection, as well as 
interfacing with physical hardware systems. To promote software component reuse, core ATOS 
components pertaining to task management, and communications, as well as higher -level 
functional components such as drive controls and user input management, will operate within the 
RAMMS software platform. Components, from simulation to rendering, environmental creation, 
experiment management, hardware integration, and functional algorithms, will be designed to be 
extensible and replaceable by developers and users to accommodate the customization needs of 
their specific application domains. Within the framework of RAMMS development, robust 
methodologies such as predictive analytics, root cause analysis, and failure mode analysis will be 
integrated to enhance RAMMP system reliability and performance. Predictive analytics techniques 
will anticipate potential system failures or malfunctions based on historical data, thereby enabling 
proactive maintenance, and minimizing downtime. Root cause analysis will be utilized to  
systematically investigate any issues or discrepancies encountered during simulation and/or real-
world deployment, pinpointing the underlying causes and informing improvements to design and 
functionality. Failure mode analysis will comprehensively identify critical failure points and 
implement mitigation strategies to enhance RAMMP system resilience and safety. RAMMS will 
be equipped to address potential challenges preemptively and ensure the reliability and robustness 
of the resulting RAMMP platform. The components developed within this program will serve the 
advancement of the RAMMP platform for next -generation M&M and serve as open -source 
reference implementations, facilitating customization or independent R&D  by other developers , 
students, and researchers . NEU will lead  the select ion of  appropriate sensors for localization, 
mapping, navigation, and obstacle negotiation across diverse realistic environments. CMU will 
lead leveraging advancements in robot learning, multimodal sensing, and assistive robotic 
manipulation, creating a comprehensive simulation framework for both hardware and software 
systems within the RAMMS engine. CMU will spearhead core engine development and API 
functionality for assistive manipulation while creating realistic home and shopping simulation 
environments. Physics-based simulation environments will provide virtual training and testing 
conducive to algorithmic development for current and future robotic M&M strategies. To augment 
simulation variety and robustness in M&M control policies, integration with the RoboGen [12] 

--- Page 11 ---
   
 
11 
 
framework will be investigated , enabling the autonomous generation of diverse physics -based 
simulation environments based on high- level task descriptions. All simulation and algorithmic 
developments will be made open source to foster a collaborative ecosystem, lowering barriers for 
researchers, developers, and stakeholders to contribute to the advancement of robotic M&M  
technology. ATOS - AT Operating System: ATDev will lead the development of the ATOS software 
stack. ATOS will be developed as a set of core components that  provide reusable, configurable, 
and reliable functionality for next-generation AT. The functionality provided by these components 
ranges from the foundational security, task management and synchronization, and communications 
features to higher -level domain-specific functionality such as drive controls, sensor fusion, and 
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). On top of this ATOS layer, specific application-
specific components will be developed for RAMMP which handles navigation, manipulation, and 
user intent determination. Given the wide range of comput ational requirements for some tasks, 
ATOS will be designed using high- level standard language features that  enable robustness, 
performance, and cross -platform compatibility across the range of low -power embedded micro -
processors to high- performance single-board computers and consumer mobile devices. With the 
use of standards-compliant programming, ATOS will be able to support interoperability between 
the low-level embedded real-time operating system FreeRTOS, as well as other standard operating 
systems. To further facilitate development and robustness the core languages of ATOS will be C++, 
with support for Rust and Swift and bindings to Python, Kotlin, an d Objective-C. Since medical 
devices require safe and reliable operation, mechanisms will be developed within ATOS that  
ensure strong isolation, mixed- criticality scheduling, as well as fault detection and mitigation. 
High-level languages Rust and Swift w ill be used to provide stronger protection for common 
reliability and security errors such as buffer overflowing and out-of-bounds indexing. Continuous 
integration pipelines will be set up which provide automated static code analysis and test building 
in addition to the manual review process that  code will go through. There exist development and 
analysis tools for managing the development and generation of complex software in a robust and 
well-documented manner – such as for modeling, analyzing, and generating the software for 
hierarchical finite state machines (HFSMs). We will be incorporating these open-source tools into 
the development processes and providing instruction for easy use by others . PACE - Power and 
Control Electronics : Pitt will manage the development of the Power and C ontrol Electronics 
(PACE) subsystem. PACE will be the electronics that perform  the low-level power management 
and distribution, drive control, wheel , and inertial odometry, and other critical functionalities  of 
the RAMMP. High -level power management will account for  battery charge/discharge, overall 
motors (i.e., PLUM, PEAR, and ARM) power dissipation, computing power, user interface, and 
high-power sensing suite. These electronics will be built using embedded microprocessors which 
will run ATOS and communicate with system components and will be responsible for specific 
tasks such as the RAMMP base drive motor control, system power management, user input/output 
management, the seating system control and management, manipulator interfacing, alternative 

--- Page 12 ---
   
 
12 
 
drive controls, and expandable auxiliary inputs/outputs . Over the communications and power 
distribution buses, PACE will receive and manage the RAMMP  motion and state control 
commands, while also negotiating power distribution and disseminating the base and seating 
systems states. PACE will support hardware -in-the-loop development, with the ability to stream 
state/sensor data into RAMMS  and receive data and control commands from RAMMS . Key 
RAMMP system functions and communications are shown in Figures 4 and 5.  PLUM - Platform 
for User Motion: ATD ev  and Pitt will develop a 6-axis Stewart platform based dynamic seating 
system to improve comfort, usability, and function over existing systems by providing the user 
with translational and rotational degrees of freedom to facilitate transfers, enhance pressure relief, 
and provide greater access to different surfaces as no current PMD can provide. Table 1 illustrates 
seating and mobility  needs and 
requirements that PMD users are 
restricted or limited to achieve  
with the capabilities of 
commercially available power 
seating functions (PSF) . The 
PLUM will consist of actuators, 
inertial and position sensors, and a 
user interface to perform standard 
PSF. Standard PSF include 
back/forth tilt, leg/foot -rest 
elevation, recline, and seat 
elevation. PSF not included in 
commercial PMD include but are 
not limited to translational 
directions to assist with 
transferring, lateral tilt for pressure relief and seating comfort, and a swivel seat to change point -
of-view in the workspace. The control architecture will incorporate safety boundaries to ensure 
user safety and prevent accidents which will involve limit ing PLUM range of motion while in a 
static position and driving speed reduction 
at pre- defined seat heights and seat 
inclinations to mitigate risks associated with 
abrupt movements. Pre -defined seating 
applications will either alert users or self -
perform pressure relief routines and assist 
while transferring.  PEAR - Platform for 
Environment Adaptation Robot:  Pitt and 
ATDev will develop a robotic PMD base to 
address traversing less accessible indoor 
and outdoor environments. PEAR design 
requirements will address the stagnated 
design of PMD  including, lack of dynamic 
stability in pitch and roll directions, limited 
 
Figure 5. Proposed next generation wheelchair ecosystem. 
Table 1. RAMMP Hardware System Requirements. 
 


--- Page 13 ---
   
 
13 
 
surface threshold of up to 3”, fixed shock absorber suspension that negatively affects whole body 
vibration and discomfort, and fixed driving wheel configuration that limits mobility in different 
environments, see Table 1. The PEAR will consist of actuators, inertial stabilization, wheeled -
legged motion and odometry sensors, a user interface, and a control system architecture to perform 
environment navigation and negotiation: 1) Indoor/Outdoor maneuvering: PEAR system will offer 
independent translational motion of each driving wheel with relation to the frame to demonstrate 
a front-, rear-, or mid- wheel drive configuration. This motion will, for example, allow users to 
extract the PMD from stuck positions. 2) Decrease in whole-body vibration exposure: PEAR will 
reduce vibration and discomfort on uneven terrains by proposing a series -elastic-actuator system 
in each wheel for environment adaptability with rapid reaction time. PEAR will measure vibration 
exposure to adapt the dynamic suspension and RAMMP speed accordingly. 3) Tip prevention: 
Height-adjustable wheels in combination with inertial sensors will be integrated into a PEAR 
dynamic model to offer automatic weight shifting in 3-axis when driving on inclined surfaces (e.g. 
steep hills, cross-slopes, curb-cuts); hence maintaining stability. 4) Step negotiation: Its degrees of 
freedom will be combined in a finite state machine to negotiate over sidewalk heights. 5) Obstacle 
navigation: Pitt will work with LUCI and NEU to incorporate sensor suite s and environment 
perception algorithm to recognize obstacles, ground inclination, and sidewalks for pre -planning 
applications. Safe driving parameters in the control architecture when approaching different 
surface inclinations and obstacles will be established. SUITE - Sensing & User Interface for Task 
Enablement: LUCI and Kinova will drive this workstream. LUCI will design and develop the 
hardware for sensing the environment around the RAMMP and combining that information into a 
representation for the user to have a full 360° view of their surroundings. The hardware, 
processing, and communications will be developed by LUCI  working with Kinova to integrate 
information into user interface for presentation and interaction. The system will provide a view of 
the surroundings and indicate where potential obstacles and hazards exist and what areas are 
potentially safe to navigate  or negotiate . Iterative trials in both RAMMS and controlled 
environments will be conducted to develop a system that benefits users most. While a major focus 
of this proposal is on creating an open- source system for robotic M&M and collaboration with 
industry and academic partners, it is critical that PWD be able to successfully interact with 
RAMMP. To provide the widest possible, open interface for user interaction, RAMMP/ATOS will 
integrate the Wheelchair Digital Interface (WDI) [13] . The WDI API is a modern, two- way 
communication standard for PMD built on widely accepted HID protocols. The second goal is the 
collaboration between LUCI, Kinova, NEU and ATDev to develop the user interface framework 
to incorporate the RAMMP functions and execute M&M ADL. The team will start with  
development of the sensor suite and ensure compatibility with ATOS ecosystem. We will prioritize 
sensors suite scalability to meet future assistive M&M needs. NEU will design an array of control 
(e.g., joystick, sip -n-puff) and feedback interfaces (e.g., tablets, verbal, combinations of 
modalities) to create “transparent” user-RAMMP interactions. Transparency here refers to a user 
being able to interpret and anticipate RAMMP behavior. These interfaces will be assessed through 
stakeholder studies. The set of features will be able to be personalized and customizable according 
to the unique preferences  and requirements. A shared autonomy framework and configurable set 
of control and feedback interfaces will be established. Most users will accept the use of technology 
to traverse doorways, cross narrow hallways, and negotiate ramps using short -term autonomous 

--- Page 14 ---
   
 
14 
 
behaviors. The term autonomy  may remain disturbing to many. Therefore, short -term, short -
distance autonomous navigation features need to be coupled with a decision- making module that 
coordinates autonomous assistance and user control inputs. NEU and P itt will produce 
probabilistic models to represent individual preferences and intentions, i.e., user models , thereby 
informing the hybrid/shared autonomy’s internal reasoning. Given prior information on a user, we 
will implement different shared autonomy strategies (e.g., sliding scale  and blending paradigms) 
and conduct iterative strategies to evaluate trade-offs. The design requirements for SUITE are: (1) 
Comprehensive Sensory Environment 
Representation: Hardware capable of sensing 
the environment around the RAMMP system, 
providing a full 360° view of the surroundings 
to the user. This hardware will combine sensing 
information into a representation for the user, 
ensuring a detailed understanding of the 
environment; (2) Integration of Sensory Data: 
Processing and communication systems to 
integrate sensory information into the RAMMP 
user interface. I ntegration will enable users to 
interact with the system effectively and receive 
real-time updates on potential obstacles and safe 
navigation paths ; (3) User Interface 
Framework: A user interface framework (Figure 6) incorporating RAMMP functions for M&M 
for ADL will prioritize compatibility with the ATOS ecosystem and scalability to meet future 
assistive M&M needs; ( 4) Transparent User -RAMMP Interactions : Control and feedback 
interfaces to ensure transparent interactions between users and RAMMP. These interfaces will be 
assessed through stakeholder studies and personalized according to individual preferences and 
requirements; (5) Shared Autonomy Framework : A shared autonomy framework will 
accommodate user preferences. This framework will incorporate short -term autonomous 
navigation and obstacle negotiation features while allowing users to retain control inputs. 
Probabilistic user models will inform decision -making process, evaluating different shared 
autonomy strategies through iterative end- user testing ; (6) Open Interface Integration: 
RAMMP/ATOS will integrate the WDI API to provide an open and widely accepted interface for 
user interaction, ensuring broad accessibility. Mobility and Manipulation Coordination:  Kinova, 
LUCI, CMU, and Cornell  will spearhead this workstream. Advances in AI and physical sensor 
technology will be leveraged alongside RAMMP  technologies, enhancing independence PMMD 
users. The RAMMP will empower users to autonomously undertake Mobility and Manipulations 
Related ADL (MMRADL). Traditional manual teleoperation poses a significant barrier to 
independence due to its time -consuming nature and heightened mental and physical fatigue 
compared to semi -autonomous control. [14, 15] By researching and developing requisite sensor 
integration and hardware, software, and firmware advancements, a technological bridge will be 
constructed to integrate AI and automation into RAMMP . This approach aims to imbue future 
PMD integrated assistive robots with situational awareness and intelligence, enabling them to 
perform complex MMRADL tasks optimally, thereby enhancing independence across various 
 
Figure 6. User interface framework for the RAMMP 
 


--- Page 15 ---
   
 
15 
 
professional, educational, residential, and 
social domains typically performed with 
arms and hands  in coordination with body 
pose and position. Tasks such as opening 
doors or drinking with commercially 
available ARM typically necessitate 
switching between PMD  and robot drive 
control modes. Tasks such as opening a 
refrigerator door and removing an item are 
extremely difficult and time consuming and 
still impossible for most people with current 
technology. These processes, coupled with 
limited movement options of the ARM and 
lack of coordination or even awareness of 
the PMD, leads to significant fatigue  and 
operational limitations. As shown in Figure 7, the user must press the mode button multiple times 
to switch control between the ARM and PMD while opening a door. Transitioning to a more 
advanced assistive robot equipped with computer vision cameras and torque sensors, operated by 
intelligent software, could streamline task completion and user satisfaction. People could indicate 
their desired manipulation target through voice commands , eye-tracking, touchscreen, or other 
preferred methods, prompting the robot and mobile base to execute coordinated complex motions 
seamlessly with the user having the ability to pause or re set at any time. By reducing fatigue and 
increasing task completion success and speed, this semi -autonomous control approach could 
maintain user autonomy while enhancing efficacy and efficiency. Looking beyond visual sensing 
modalities, the integration of multimodal sensing capabilities at the robot’s end effector is crucial 
for enabling more dexterous and robust manipulation assistance. K inova, CMU and C ornell will 
develop and integrate new end effector sensors to support the ARM capabilities of the RAMMP. 
Through an iterative design and evaluation procedure, sensing modalities will be implemented and 
assessed, building on recent R&D advances in multimodal sensors for ARM [16-19], integrated at 
the end effector including 1) force sensors to enable precision grasping and handling of objects; 2) 
capacitive proximity sensor arrays to aid in grasp alignment and obstacle avoidance [17, 19, 20] ; 
3) temperature sensors to enable prediction of object material properties to inform manipulation 
strategies [16]; and 4) vibration sensors to offer insights into object materials and sensory feedback 
during manipulation. To achieve robotic manipulation requirements, manipulation algorithms will 
be deeply integrated with the multimodal sensor suite present on PEAR and the K inova ARM 
systems. The initial manipulation learning phase will utilize RGB-D visual data from the RAMMP 
cameras and the resulting control policies and algorithms will be expanded to new sensor 
modalities as they become available on the RAMMP platfo rm. Synchronization of semi -
autonomous ARM control with RAMMP  seat and base motion is crucial. Incorporating sensors 
developed by LUCI into the RAMMP base will enable safe navigation while carrying an item (e.g., 
glass or tray) in common environments, to include amongst other people . Similar to how 
individuals adjust body pose and orientation to support arm  and hand motions during tasks, the 
ARM could be programmed to auto orient the RAMMP seat and mobility base for enhanced safety, 
 
Figure 7. Control modes of the ARM with PMD functions. 


--- Page 16 ---
   
 
16 
 
effectiveness, and efficiency during operation. Intelligent software will be situationally and 
contextually aware. The type or nature of the item being transported and mani pulated will 
influence preferences for trajectory execution. For example, carrying a hot liquid in a cup across a 
room crowded with people is much different than carrying an apple across an emp ty room. 
Similarly, the preferred speed and trajectory for bringing a cup of hot liquid in front of a person to 
drink may be much different than that to take a bite from an apple. Technical, user, and situational 
factors are critical for the ultimate success of this technology. Household and Shopping 
Applications. This initiative aims to transform the interaction between PWD  who use RAMMP 
and environments through the R&D  of real -world ARM capabilities. CMU  and Cornell are 
dedicated to achieving three key objectives: 1) Develop ARM capabilities for diverse home and 
shopping tasks; 2) Design a multimodal end effector sensing suite to augment ARM capabilities; 
and 3) Facilitate real-world deployments to refine and validate technologies with stakeholders in 
diverse environments. The ARM algorithms will center on handling a set of key items in home and 
shopping environments that are commonly requested, including cups, utensils, remote controls, a 
smartphone, jars and boxed food, and personal care products. The team will build upon work 
manipulating articulated objects pervasive in the home, such as doors, cabinets, microwaves, 
drawers, and light switches. These manipulation strategies will entail both grasping handles and 
levers and performing the correct coordinated M&M  sweeping motion to open or close along an 
axis of rotation and translation. Control algorithms will provide subtle assistance, such as aligning 
the RAMMP and its robot end-effector to a target object, where manipulation is not autonomous, 
and the user directly controls most of the robot’s motion. However, for routine tasks, we will 
introduce robot policies that provide greater levels of autonomy. To accelerate mobile base and 
ARM cooperative movement development activities, LUCI’s Sandbox ROS2 software developer 
kit (SDK) will be utilized for testing before the availability of a fully functioning RAMMP base 
and RAMMS. To use the SDK CMU and C ornell will first use a LUCI -enabled PMD with 
LuciCore Sandbox Edition, Version 2.0.3 or greater. LUCI will provide training, support, and 
information required to successfully test cooperative movement solutions both in simulation and 
in the real-world. The cooperative drive solutions will be shared with the team via the public, open 
SDK repo. The team will develop assistive robotic manipulation techniques to empower 
independently performing tasks inside and outside of the home. Focus will be on the development 
of human-in-the-loop and behavior cloning strategies, integrating recent advances in learning for 
manipulation and diffusion policies [21, 22] . These methods will be designed to learn initial 
generalizable M&M strategies from a limited number of M&M demonstrations. Demonstrations 
will be accessible to users via an onboard joystick or via kinesthetic teaching. Once deployed, 
strategies will be designed to fine -tune policies through additional demonstrations in a continual 
learning process. Meal preparation, eating/drinking and clean- up are extremely challenging but 
essential. Cornell will develop data -driven algorithms and real -world systems that leverage 
physics-based simulations to develop control policies for meal preparation , eating/drinking, and 
clean-up. It is common for PWD who rely on human caregivers to align their days around caregiver 
availability. Coordinated robotic M&M has the potential to provide PWD  with greater autonomy 
and flexibility optimizing human assistan ce when available. The robotic assistance simulation 
world, RCareWorld [23], will be extended with a wider variety of human avatars of intended PWD, 
and support for M&M of rigid, soft, and articulated bodies with a broad range of physics engine 

--- Page 17 ---
   
 
17 
 
backends. Real-to-sim-to-real approaches will be deployed with a wide variety of physical 
characteristics including food items, utensils, plates, cups, and food containers. The key idea here 
is to use simulations -in-the-loop to explore effective strategies for removing items (drinks, pre -
prepared meals – soup, sandwich, warp ) from a refri gerator and off a counter or shelf , opening 
“Tupperware” containers, “zip-loc” bags, removing “press and seal” wrapping, heating meals in a 
microwave oven, placing pre-prepared meals and drinks on a plate or tray, eating/drinking, and 
then placing plates/trays, cups, and utensils  in a waste receptacle and placing items in or near a 
sink or dishwasher. B efore executing them in the real world for effective meal preparation , 
eating/drinking, and clean-up without damaging items or making a mess . The team will leverage 
the power of visual-language models and large-language models for a variety of in-the-wild pre-
prepared meals (ordered directly from restaurants or home -made dishes) while catering to user 
preferences expressed through language. Robots are bound to eventually fail in the real world due 
to uncertainty in perception and planning, which will be addressed by developing a flexible system 
that trades off robot autonomy with user queries for developing robust human- in-the-loop 
approaches, that can not only recover from anomalies with expert human input but can also help 
users preserve their sense of agency. Data-driven methods will be developed that can distinguish 
subtle physical interactions such as incidental contacts or collisions between utensil or straw and 
mouth due to limited mouth opening, impulsive contacts due to involuntary motions or spasms , 
sliding or sloshing of food or drink on plate, tray or in a bowl or cup, grasp of utensils, opening of 
containers or pack aging. Leveraging these event classifiers, physical -interaction aware control 
methods will be developed that can invoke downstream task- space goal tracking and compliant 
controllers depending on specific event s. Human-in-the-loop approaches will be developed and 
implemented to recover from anomalies due to robot autonomy in unstructured settings and 
provide PWD with a greater sense of agency.  Design Requirements : (1) Advances in AI and 
physical sensor technology will be leveraged alongside RAMMP technologies to enhance 
independence for users of PMMD ; (2) The RAMMP system will empower users to use sliding 
autonomy to undertake M&M Related ADL (MMRADL); (3) Traditional manual teleoperation 
poses significant barriers to independence due to being time-consuming with heightened mental 
and physical fatigue compared to semi -autonomous control. R&D  efforts will focus on sensor 
integration and hardware, software, and firmware advancements to bridge this gap; (4) A 
technological bridge will be created to integrate AI and automation into assistive robots on mobile 
bases. This approach aims to imbue future PMD  integrated assistive robots with situational 
awareness and intelligence, enabling them to perform complex MMRADL tasks optimally, thereby 
enhancing independence across various professional, educational, residential, and social domains 
typically performed with ARMs and hands in coordination with body pose and position; (5) Tasks 
such as opening doors or manipulating items with ARMs typically require switching between PMD 
and robot drive control modes. Transitioning to more advanced ARM equipped with computer 
vision cameras and torque sensors, operated by intelligent software, could streamline task 
completion and user satisfaction. The ARM and PMD could execute coordinated complex motions 
seamlessly with the user having the ability to pause, intervene, or reset at any time; (6) By reducing 
fatigue and increasing task completion success and speed, this semi-autonomous control approach 
could maintain user autonomy while enhancing efficacy and efficiency; (7) Synchronization of 
semi-autonomous ARM control with RAMMP seat and base motion is crucial for seamless 

--- Page 18 ---
   
 
18 
 
operation and increased ADL capability ; (8) Incorporating sensors developed by LUCI into the 
RAMMP base and  incorporating more powerful sensors in the K inova ARM will enable safe 
navigation while carrying items in common environments, including among other people ; (9) 
Similar to how individuals adjust body pose and orientation to support arm  and hand motions 
during tasks, the ARM will be programmed to auto orient the RAMMP seat and mobility base for 
enhanced safety, effectiveness, and efficiency during operation; (10) Sensor fusion with intelligent 
software will be situationally and contextually aware, considering factors such as the type or nature 
of the item being transported and manipulated, preferences for trajectory execution, and technical, 
user, and situational factors critical for the ultimate success of this technology ; (11) downstream 
task-space goal tracking and compliant controllers based  on specific events.  Assisted Mobility 
Applications: Most robotic PMD solutions either assume the ground is safe, move  at very slow 
speeds so they can stop before a drop-off, or rely on pre-mapped locations [24]. Our first goal for 
assisted mobility is to integrate and expand upon LUCI’s current capabilities with  the RAMMP 
including sensors, computer, and connectivity to accelerate the R&D of active suspension, self -
leveling, curb negotiation, and uneven terrain traversing capabilities. Our second goal is to develop 
a personalized shared autonomy framework that can assist PWD  with indoor and outdoor 
navigation while respecting preferences, needs, and intent . The resulting RAMMP will thus feel 
familiar, trustworthy, and easy to understand, in addition to providing safety guarantees for PMD 
users operating the platform. The Assisted Mobility Application (AMA) framework consists of 3 
thrusts: 1) Create indoor assistive navigation capabilities for RAMMP;  2) Extend these assistive 
navigation capabilities to outdoor environments;  3) expanded obstacle neg otiation, 4) obstacle 
recognition and classification and path planning, and 5) Establish a shared autonomy framework. 
To achieve these goals, NEU, LUCI, P itt, and Purdue  will push three frontiers in the context of 
mobility assistance for robotic PMD : robotic perception, levels of autonomous navigation, 
environment negotiation strategies, and vehicle ingress/egress negotiation. RAMMP Perception: 
A critical component of AMA framework is the perception layer. LUCI and Pitt will collaborate to 
develop the attitude control tracking hardware/software required for the RAMMP active 
suspension and then integrate the output into LUCI’s ground monitoring system so that it can 
accommodate the constantly changing ride height and orientation of the RAMMP base as it 
maneuvers obstacles. LUCI will develop an API so that LUCI’s ground detection software can be 
provided as a compiled software module to P itt for use in RAMMP. To allow rapid, parallel 
development and testing during RAMMP design, prior to a functioning prototype, LUCI’s 
Sandbox ROS2 software developer kit (SDK) will be utilized to gather data and test ground 
detection in preparation for integra tion with active RAMMP suspe nsion activation. LUCI will 
update Pitt’s current Sandbox-compatible PMD base with the latest hardware and software. LUCI 
will collaborate with Pitt to successfully gather data and test solutions both in simulation and in 
real life.  Once a sensor suite has been ported onto the physical RAMMP, NEU will leverage 
multimodal sensing to detect static obstacles, as well as track and predict dynamic obstacles (e.g., 
pedestrians). Semantic regions of relevance in the environment will also be extracted to inform 
motion planning. These regions will include traversable “gaps” (e.g., doorways), avoidable objects 
(e.g., obstacles that are “moveable” with an on- board ARM), segmented areas of navigation risk 
(e.g., snowy, or icy terrain), and elevation changes (e.g., road ramps to sidewalks). Levels of 
Autonomous Navigation: Tackling assistive navigation in both indoor and outdoor environments 

--- Page 19 ---
   
 
19 
 
will require extensive testing in simulation, accurate localization and mapping, and risk- aware 
motion planning. For localization and mapping, the AMA team will feed RAMMP’s multisensory 
data (e.g., lidar, encoders, cameras, IMUs) into the state-of-the-art ORB-SLAM3 package [13]. 
Sensors suitable for outdoor use (e.g., GPS/GNSS and lidar/cameras with anti-sunlight glare) will 
be employed for localization in varied lighting and weather conditions. Once RAMMP can be 
localized in a 3D map of its surroundings, perception component s will supply information to a 
motion planning module on static/dynamic obstacles, estimated regions of risk, and classify as 
“avoidable” or “negotiable” barriers. Based on these perceptions, NEU will expand on our recent 
advances in autonomous navigation to produce user preferred  plans of motion for RAMMP [25-
28]. Environmental Negotiation Strategies: In addition to navigating environments, RAMMP 
must overcome challenging environments consistently while maintaining the user's  safety and 
comfort. The RAMMP base (PEAR) consists of multiple DoFs which allow for the development 
of alternative environment negotiation strategies. LUCI, Pitt, and NEU will work together to create 
a URDF from the PEAR CAD model. A  dynamic model of PEAR will be generated to optimize 
closed-loop control that adapts RAMMP to the environment. Finite state machines (FSM) will be 
created to include the activation of the self-leveling and curb negotiation applications according to 
the detected surface by the LUCI sensor suite. Safety layers will be incorporated into the FSM 
when reaching stability boundaries. LUCI will collaborate with P itt on multiple rounds of testing 
and efficacy verification of the ground detection and safety systems on RAMMP. Vehicle 
Ingress/Egress and Docking N egotiation: Purdue will focus on transportation tasks that are 
commonly performed and have significant impacts on the safety, effectiveness, and independence 
of power wheelchair users. A RAMMP prototype will be used to determine effective approaches 
in accomplishing transportation ADLs and how to best assess success. A combination of expert 
users and engineering students will define the physical parameters of the tasks within the EASI 
RIDER test vehicle and model the movements of RAM MP user s during the completion of 
transportation tasks. Purdue, Pitt, LUCI, and NEU will collaborate  to create path planning and 
navigation algorithms for vehicle ingress/egress and docking. Design parameters developed during 
mockup testing will be integrated into the revised prototype RAMMP system s and associated 
ATOS to perform identified transportation ADL solutions. For those tasks that cannot be readily 
integrated into the RAMMP platform they will be evaluated using the RAMMS system.  
Redesigned control protocols will be shared with partners for beta testing of RAMMP for  
transportation tasks. Evaluation of the RAMMP will be compared to current practices. Design 
Requirements for Development of Assisted Mobility Applications : Integrate and expand upon 
LUCI’s current capabilities with the RAMMP, including sensors, computer, and connectivity, to 
accelerate the development of active suspension, self -leveling, curb negotiation, and uneven 
terrain traversing capabilities of the base.  We will d evelop a personalized shared autonomy 
framework that can assist PWD with indoor and outdoor navigation while respecting preferences, 
needs, and intent. The resulting AMA framework aims to feel familiar, trustworthy, and easy to 
understand, while providing safety guarantees for users operating the platform. The AMA 
framework consists of several thrusts:  (1) Creation of indoor assistive navigation capabilities for 
RAMMP. (2) Extension of these assistive navigation capabilities to outdoor environments. (3) 
Expanded obstacle negotiation, recognition, and classification. (4) Path planning. (5) 
Establishment of a shared autonomy framework.  A critical component of the AMA framework is 

--- Page 20 ---
   
 
20 
 
the perception layer. LUCI and P itt will collaborate to develop attitude control tracking 
hardware/software required for RAMMP active suspension. LUCI will provide ground monitoring 
system integration and develop an API for ground detection software, enabling parallel 
development and testing during RAMMP design. Extensive testing in simulation, accurate 
localization and mapping, and risk-aware motion planning are required for assistive navigation in 
both indoor and outdoor environments. The AMA team will employ multisensory data fusion and 
SLAM packages for localization and mapping, while utilizing sensors suitable for outdoor use to 
account for varied lighting and weather conditions. RAMMP will consistently overcome 
challenging environments while maintaining user safety and comfort. LUCI, Pitt, and NEU will 
collaborate to create a dynamic model of the RAMMP, optimize closed-loop control, and develop 
finite state machines (FSMs) to activate self -leveling and curb negotiation applications based on 
LUCI sensor suite input. Purdue will focus on transportation tasks commonly performed by PWD. 
Purdue, P itt, LUCI, and NEU work will result in path planning and navigation algorithms for 
vehicle ingress/egress and docking. 
S3 – C – Phase 3: Efficacy and Effectiveness Evaluation 
Feasibility evaluation: The Pitt team will lead assessments with PMMD users to evaluate alpha 
RAMMP features and applications. Up to 25  PMMD users will participate in hour -long focus 
groups, either in-person or remotely. Focus group sessions will involve interviews exploring the 
perceived benefits, limitations, and areas for improvement of RAMMP. Following each session, 
participants will complete a demographic questionnaire. Audio recordings of focus groups will be 
transcribed, with any identifiable information redacte d. An interview guide will be used  to 
structure the discussions. Thematic analysis will be employed as the analytical method. Initially, 
two research team members will develop a codebook using a deductive approach, focusing on 
anticipated responses to basic questions. After the focus groups, coders will individually code the 
transcripts and then collaborate to refine the codebook using an inductive approach. The finalized 
codebook will be utilized by both coders using NVivo 12 software. [29] Any coding discrepancies 
will be resolved. After coding, the coders will review the transcripts independently to identify 
broad themes, which will then be refined and presented to the entire research team for analyst 
triangulation based on their subject m atter expertise. Expert User Testing: Pitt and Purdue will 
lead perception assessments with 3 expert PMMD users will assess the performance of an alpha 
RAMMP prototype compared to their existing PMMDs in completing predefined ADL tasks. This 
evaluation wil l involve an iterative process where RAMMP applications will be implemented 
monthly by academic partners, allowing for an ongoing assessment of user performance with 
RAMMP in executing ADL tasks. The 3 expert users, who are team members, represent varying 
levels of mobility impairment, ensuring  RAMMP applications are tailored to meet their specific 
needs. Participants will undergo training and receive demonstrations of the RAMMP applications 
on Day 1 of the study. Subsequently, they will evaluate the applications designed for each ADL 
task over five trials conducted on subsequent days. The study will span five days, with each day 
dedicated to a proposed ADL task, and will be repeated monthly for up to one year. Functionality 
and performance metrics established in Phase 1 will be collected during each trial. Testing may 
occur in participants' homes, workplaces, or other locations where they commonly perform ADLs. 
Efficacy Testing: The academic team members will conduct efficacy testing of the RAMMP for 
ADL corresponding with their domain of greatest expertise: P itt – assisted mobility negotiation, 
employment, and community participation; NEU – mobility navigation assistance ; CMU - 
shopping and household tasks ; Cornell – meal preparation, eating/drinking, and clean -up; and 

--- Page 21 ---
   
 
21 
 
Purdue – transportation access. 50 participants will be recruited, with 10 individuals at each site 
(across 5 sites), which will give us >80% power to detect improvements in  usability and 
performance of RAMMP compared to their PMMD in controlled indoor and outdoor environments 
to ensure safety in executing M &M based ADL. Testing will be conducted in laboratory settings 
where investigators will provide a comprehensive demonstration of the RAMMP. Participants will 
be appropriately fitted to the RAMMP before undergoing training. They will then engage in 
practice sessions with common ADL until they become proficient. Following this familiarization 
period, participants will perform the same ADL using both their PMMD and the RAMMP for five 
trials. Notably, not all tasks may be feasible with PMMD. Each academic partner will concentrate 
on their specific ADL focus area within their respective facilities.  Performance and usability 
metrics, including but not limited to task completion time, accuracy, and user satisfaction, will be 
systematically collected for each ADL both during and at the conclusion of the study. Feedback 
for enhancement purposes will be elicited through follow-up inquiries. Validated tools and metrics 
for performance evaluation will include the Functional Mobility Assessment (FMA) for assessing 
ADL tasks, the USAT test for usability, and the Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with AT 
(QUEST) for measuring user satisfaction. Subjective feedback will be gathered through structured 
interviews or surveys to gain qualitative insights into user experience and identify areas for 
improvement. Clinical Limits of Use and RESNA Standards Testing: Pitt will lead this task. The 
CLOUT was devel oped to systematically identify the features and performance constraints of 
PMMD to ensure safety and efficacy [30]. CLOUT incorporates evaluations based on RESNA 
power wheelchair standards to assess parameters such as stability, energy consumption, 
dimensions, and braking performance. In preparation for testing the pre -beta RAMMP prototype 
in community settings, it will undergo evaluation using the CLOUT tool to ascertain potential risks 
to user safety. The CLOUT protocol will be executed in three distinct phases: Establishment of an 
independent team of experts and development of a comprehensive testing plan. Implementation of 
RAMMP testing procedures and correlation of product features and limitations with user ability 
requirements. Analysis of user profiles, identification of training needs, and formulation of a 
service and maintenance plan, followed by a re-evaluation of the RAMMP prototype in alignment 
with updated standards. This structured approach utilizing the CLOUT tool ensures a thorough 
assessment of the RAMMP prototype's safety and performance characteristics, facilitating 
informed decision- making prior to it s deployment in real -world settings. Community-Based 
Testing: The academic team members will execute an iterative two -week deployment and 
subsystem evaluation with stakeholders within their respective environments, incorporating 
defined ADL. These investigations will involve PMD users. The testing of the RAMMP will focus 
on assessing its efficacy in accomplishing ADL. Each academic partner will collaborate with 
clinical partners for participant recruitment and assessment of RAMMP in community -based 
settings. A cohort of 25 participants will be recruited, with 5 individuals at each site across the 
designated 5 sites. These participants will undergo training in the features of RAMMP and evaluate 
its functionality. ADL activities will encompass a range of tasks including indoor and outdoor 
mobility, grocery shopping, meal preparation, eating/drinking, participation in volunteering/social 
activities, and work- related tasks. The study will span 5 days, with one day allocated for each 
proposed ADL. The effectiveness of RAMMP functionality and its impact on users' autonomy will 
be compared against their existing PMD . Function and performance metrics will assess the 
integrated level of performance and participation, utilizing metrics established during Phase 1. 
RAMMP efficacy in enhancing independence and user satisfaction regarding ADL relative to PMD 
will be evaluated based on statistically significant changes observed through the Wilcoxon signed-

--- Page 22 ---
   
 
22 
 
rank test. Testing will be conducted at locations incorporating the selected ADL. RAMMP will be 
adjusted to accommodate user requirements  and seating needs. Each site will be responsible for 
data collection, data sharing, and experimental findings. The potential practice effect inherent in 
users' familiarity with their own PMD  will be considered in comparison of results, ensuring a 
comprehensive assessment of RAMMP performance and usability. Education Outreach and 
Engagement: This project will investigate multifaceted applications of the RAMMP device in 
enhancing ADL for PWD. By leveraging a user -centered PADE approach, we aim to cultivate a 
deeper understanding of the challenges faced by PWD in their daily lives, thereby informing future 
AT solutions. Through a learn- by-doing educational framework, this project will serve as a 
platform for educating future AT developers about the complexities and barriers encountered by 
PWD. Each academic partner will integrate the RAMMP into educational offerings , fosteri ng 
hands-on R&D, and disability awareness activities.  Education metrics will include  knowledge 
acquisition: Assessing students' understanding of disability issues, AT principles, and PADE 
concepts through pre- and post-assessment tests. Evaluation of student proficiency in conducting 
user testing, designing inclusive solutions, and implementing PADE  methodologies. Gauging 
students' attitudes towards disability and AT through surveys. Tracking the quality and innovation 
of student -led projects and R&D  initiatives related to AT and disability inclusion. Measuring 
collaboration with disability advocacy groups, community organizations, and PWD  in the 
development and testing of the RAMMP. By integrating RAMMP into academic curricula, 
students will gain practical experience in AT R&D, develop empathy, sensitivity, and a 
commitment to creating inclusive designs addressing the needs of PWD. This educational initiative 
aims to cultivate a new generation of engineers , designers, and clinicians who are equipped with 
the knowledge, skills, and values necessary to drive meaningful innovation in the field of AT. 
S3 – C – Phase 4: Integration and Documentation 
Phase 4 aims to document the RAMMP project’s achievements by capturing its technical outcomes 
and preparing components to be an educational tool as well as commercially viable product s that 
could not be addressed through traditional R&D or commercial activities. The technical goals will 
be preserved through detailed documentation, software and hardware, and project closeout 
procedures. These steps will ensure that RAMMP can be adopted and adapted for future 
innovations.  Integration and Finalization: ATDev and Pitt will lead the final refinement of the 
RAMMP systems, both hardware and software ensuring that each element is robust and resilient. 
They will collaborate closely with partners to bring together distinct elements into a unified whole, 
characterized by enhanced interoperability and effectiveness. A goal is to demonstrate the proof -
of-concept by showcasing how the RAMMP  can function seamlessly and effectively, thus 
revolutionizing AT. Documentation and Knowledge Transfer : The team  will create 
comprehensive technical documentation for the RAMMP system and ensure that essential details 
are accessible to stakeholders. This documentation will include operation manuals and updates to 
the repository. Pitt  and ATDev will collaborate on the creation of detailed technical documents 
tailored for stakeholders, which serves to improve access and understanding of RAMMP’s output 
to advance the field of AT.  Community Engagement and Accessibility : The academic partners  
will take the reins for community release, targeting wider accessibility and user engagement with 
the RAMMP system to improve the quality of life for P WD and the educational tool access for 
researchers and educators across multidisciplinary fields. This will include  RAMMP 
recommendations and produce a comprehensive RAMMP report. Sustainability and Proprietary 
Management: As the project nears completion, the team will work collaboratively to manage the 

--- Page 23 ---
   
 
23 
 
open-source materials, intellectual and physical property, and financial aspects to set the stage for 
a project that remains useful and viable long after its official conclusion. LUCI will provide 
essential updates and documentation for the SDKs, facilitating the incorporation of AI/ML 
algorithms and enhancing RAMMP adaptability to new or unforeseen challenges. K inova will 
make the advances in their technology available to researchers, and end- users for sale.  AT Dev  
plans to move forward with deployment to e ducation, developers, researchers, and end -users of 
ATOS, RAMMS, PEAR and PLUM as this project comes to close. 
S3 - D - Comparison with Other Research 
Limitations of  Power Mobility and M anipulation Devices: This project aims to develop a 
pioneering AT platform that will address end-user challenges to perform MMADL independently. 
The identified ADL represent challenging tasks which - if solved - will provide a leap forward in 
the quality of life for users of PMMD and would allow users to go through their day with greater 
freedom and independence. Achieving this goal is herein referred to as the 12- hour challenge -  
which this program aims to solve, opening the door to developing solutions for full 24- hour 
freedom and independence. The difficulties of instrumental ADLs increase with impairments 
acquired during aging, illness, or injury. Over 12% of US adults report mobility-related disabilities. 
Among them, 41% of long-term care users need assistance from caregivers with at least one ADL. 
[31] This contributes to growing health- care expenditures of US $490B annually which are 
expected to double by 2040. PMMD have played a key role in providing mobility, independence, 
and participation in the community for PWD. [32] An estimated 500,000 people benefit from 
PMMD in the US and growth is expected at a rate of 4.5% every year. [33] Current PMMD offer 
limited mobility indoors and outdoors in Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant 
environments. [33] PMMD users frequently have difficulties driving over uneven terrains or 
overcoming architectural barriers such as curbs, curb-cuts, and hazardous environments. [34] The 
most common wheelchair-related accidents in such environments were tips and falls [1, 2] due to 
loss of traction (slip), getting stuck (immobilized), loss of stability [3], or overlooked surfaces. [2, 
4] More than 100,000 wheelchair-related injuries are treated in emergency departments in the US 
every year. [3] Research has demonstrated that users adapted their behavior by choosing accessible 
routes [5]; hence restricting community participation. An often overlooked, need of PMMD users 
is their desire to perform instrumental ADL . A recent report shows that about 19.9 million 
Americans experience difficulties in upper extremity functions, including lifting, grasping, 
pushing/pulling, reaching, dressing, and eating  [32]. Among older adults  with degenerative 
symptoms, the need for assistance in object manipulation is increasing [35]. Options for improving 
mobility at home have increased, but at -home assistance for users with arm  impairments is often 
limited to low -tech manipulation devices  [36] or reliance on a caregiver . [37] Even in people  
without clinical diagnoses specifically impacting motor function, reaching,  and grasping abilities 
decrease with age. [38] These conditions are not static  and change over a lifetime, requiring AT 
that can adapt to these variations.  Solving these problems requires innovation not only in the 
devices and technology available but also in the processes in  which the devices are designed and 
developed. Current PMMDs  are designed with decades -old technology whose outdated and 
proprietary interfaces prohibit significant R&D  advances that have happened in perception, 
robotics, AI, and related fields from reaching the users who would benefit from them the most.  
Providing independent mobility with an appropriate PMMD  may be the most important 

--- Page 24 ---
   
 
24 
 
determinant of quality of life for some PWD . [38] A PMMD with greater sensing and actuation 
capabilities is needed to perform desired mobility -related ADL (e.g., participating in healthcare, 
social and work activities, shopping, etc.) and achieve appropriate community participation.  
Assisted Mobility Applications : Obstacle detection  and classification for static and dynamic 
obstacles is an integral aspect of autonomous navigation, especially with obstacle negotiation 
capabilities. When navigating dynamic human environments (e.g., pedestrians actively sharing 
space), reinforcement learning coupled with a simulator for algorithmic training has seen success 
in recent years. [26] In real-world settings, the terrain PMD users navigate is constantly evolving. 
Probabilistic motion models are vital for mobile robots to predict and adapt to the dynamics of 
encountered terrains. [27, 28] While collision-free navigation is a major requirement of a ssisted 
mobility, it is also a critical capability for a mobile robot to “negotiate” obstacles, rather than 
simply avoid. NEU developed an initial prototype of an affordance-aware navigation system, with 
objects deemed “push able ” or “pullable” using an ARM attached to a mobile robot . [25] This 
concept of affordances will be extended to consider “climbable” or “negotiable” obstacles, e.g., 
for platforms like MEBot . [39] Creating robotic assisted mobility with PADE  is of growing 
importance in the field of robotic PM MD. Previous work has inferred human intent from the 
environment state and user  control commands to inform the subsequent navigation assistance 
provided via shared autonomy. [40] Intention estimation algorithms recognize intended low-level 
PMD maneuvers and employ sequential computing blocks over recognized maneuvers to organize 
them into a higher-level goal, such as “traverse doorway”. Aside from modeling human behavior 
from the robot’s perspective, the user must intuitively understand and inte ract with the robotic 
PMD platform. For example, certain PWD  may require low -dimensional or low -throughput 
control devices (e.g., sip -n-puff) to operate a PMD. [41] The role of VR/AR in robotic PMD  
applications has been previously considered to foster an immersive experience . [42, 43] Assisted 
Manipulation Applications: Development of robotic manipulation for AT has largely focused on 
enhancing the physical capabilities of PWD  through purely teleoperated ARM. [44-46] While 
these systems have made strides in providing basic assistance, they require intensive user input 
and lack adaptive learning capabilities. Our initiative emphasizes the integration of human-in-the-
loop learning mechanisms and behavior cloning to develop manipulation strategies that evolve 
with the PWD needs and preferred control strategies . [47] This approach represents a significant 
leap from static, predefined manipulation strategies towards dynamic, adaptable solutions that 
prioritize user autonomy and ease of use. When it comes to assistive manipulation—where PWD 
actively participate in the manipulation process —most assistive robots are limited to utilizing a 
single sensing modality. [17, 48] There remains a high need to investigate how ARM can leverage 
multiple complimentary sensing modalities to improve the ease and success rate of manipulation 
tasks. Alternative ARM specialized in assisted eating have been introduced on the market [49-57] 
but lack widespread acceptance  due to t heir limited utility  and only partial relief of need for 
personal assistance. Researchers have  developed robot -assisted eating systems, either as table -
mounted ARMs [58-74], general purpose mobile manipulators [75-77], or PMD-mounted ARMs. 
[78-84] A comprehensive review of meal assistance robots is given in [85-88]. Some assistive 
systems focus more on support or adaptation to the user. S everal emphasize tremor cancellation 
during an eating task [89-91], while others provide support for users who can move their arm  but 
do not have sufficient muscular strength or control for continued large movements. [92-94] Among 

--- Page 25 ---
   
 
25 
 
some of the assistive eating systems based on autonomous robots, Park et al. [76] used a general-
purpose manipulator to scoop yogurt with a spoon communicating with the user via a web 
interface. Ettehadi and Behal [95] used learning from demonstration to learn scooping trajectories 
for robotic assisted eating. Other examples of ARM that can skewer solid food items with a fork 
are Herlant  [96], who explored modeling an intelligent bite -timing model in social dining 
scenarios, and Gallenberger et al. [82], who developed a system that can detect a solid food item 
specified by a user and pick it up autonomously. Both these studies did not develop an explicit 
user-interface and did not test the system with PWD . Canal et al.  [97], developed an intelligent 
personalization framework for robot -assisted eating systems. Despite this work, there remains a 
large gap in robot-assisted systems that can reliably and robustly serve pre-prepared meals (e.g., 
remove from ref rigerator or packaging, heat in a microwave or oven ), assist with eating and 
drinking, and facilitate clean -up (e.g., place in a sink or on a countertop) . Manipulation and 
Mobility Synergy Gap: Programming autonomous control of PM MD is extremely complex and 
unique to the different hardware and software systems. P revious R&D has focused on enhanced 
methods of interaction and control of stationary robotic manipulators. Studies have included hybrid 
control methods of ARM using speech recognition, gesture recognition, joystick control, and 
computer vision. [98, 99] The extension of this proposed research to more intuitively operate ARM 
mounted to a PMD  poses much greater technical challenges while offering significant 
improvements in the types of tasks that could be accomplished by PWD and their environments. 
The development of ATOS, RAMMS, and RAMMP will unify how these different systems can be 
controlled using a single operating system, which will dramatically spur new innovations for the 
RAMMP system by a community of engineers. ATOS and RAMMS Rationale : A goal of this 
project is the creation of an open-source PMMD for constant development of ADL applications by 
the academic and industrial community. Many different systems, tools, and platforms have been 
developed to facilitate the development of advanced robotic systems. The Robot Operating System 
(ROS) [100, 101], F’ [102], and DREMS-OS [103, 104] are used in academic R&D  for various 
application domains has developed a wide range of packages for solving various robotic 
perception, planning, and interaction tasks. There is a gap in these systems which makes 
developing advanced robotic devices a challenging problem, requiring engineers  to create 
reliability and security mechanisms needed for safety -critical applications while developing 
application-specific robotics systems and embedded implementations. ROSMOD  [105, 106]  
provides a collaborative, version- controlled, model -based design and synthesis development 
environment that includes code generation with hierarchical finite state machines; however, it does 
not provide tools to aid the designer in ensuring reliability and security for safety- critical 
applications and it is limited by the ROS -1 platform that it targets. To help address the challenge 
of creating complex, reliable, safe, and secure robotics, different tools have been developed which 
aid in the design, analysis, integration, and testing of these systems. Examples of simulation tools 
include Nvidia ISAAC [107], AirSim [108], CARLA [109], and Gazebo [110]. RCareWorld [23]  
which is more specifically targeted towards human machine interaction with caregiving robots. 
These simulations require a significant amount of domain-expertise and development for use with 
advanced medical robotics with a high-fidelity model. Substantial work is required to enable the 
use of hardware in the loop (HIL) in which the real hardware and on- board algorithms are tested 
against a simulated environment, hence a digital twin. Although R&D in physics simulation 

--- Page 26 ---
   
 
26 
 
environments for AT domains is limited, the two existing platforms Assistive Gym [111, 112] and 
RcareWorld [23], have both been developed as general -purpose platforms that currently lack the 
functionality or diversity representative in robotic PM MD use-cases. The creation of physics -
based simulation environments for both household and shopping tasks via RAMMS engine 
extends well beyond current capabilities. 
S3 - E - Previous Accomplishments 
Pitt has created robotic platforms for R&D and practical use for PWD, for example, Strong ARM 
[113], PerMMA [114], MEBot [115], NexHealth Bed [116]. Expertise extends to legged-wheeled 
robotic PMD, control system algorithms, and pioneering user -centered PADE approaches. NEU  
partners offer expertise in functional ARM platforms and robot navigation, leveraging deep neural 
networks and motion models for terrain classification and obstacle negotiation. CMU  brings 
experience in physically assistive robotic systems for household tasks, including eating and 
dressing assistance, as well as novel sensing modalities for advanced perception and manipulation 
capabilities. Cornell contributions include research on robot-assisted eating and development of a 
user-centric robotic caregiving simulation world. P urdue team members have a background in 
M&M for PWD, with a focus on inclusion in transportation and the development of AI models. 
ATDev, Kinova, and LUCI each contribute industry expertise in developing AT, ranging from 
ARM to smart technology accessories for PMD , emphasizing human- centric design and 
innovation. Work at Pitt has demonstrated the benefits of robotic PMD to address mobility-based 
ADL challenges. Previous work on a mobility enhancement robot (MEBot) PMD encompasses an 
interface between a proprietary PMD  controller and a customized embedded system to semi -
automate driving features. MEBot consists of six independently height -adjustable wheels with a 
modular drive-wheel configuration, and a footprint comparable to commercially available PMD. 
MEBot has unique abilities to perform advanced mobility applications such as seat-leveling [9] to 
increase stability when navigating steep hills and cross slopes and curb- climbing [117] for 
accessibility when encountering architectural barriers. Pitt has  pioneered a user -centered PADE 
approach to create mobility applications at different levels of automation and customized UIs to 
users’ preferences and levels of impairment. MEBot is one of the few robotic PMD that has been 
tested with PWD in the community. [39] CMU has experience leading real-world deployments of 
physically assistive robotic systems for household tasks and ADL, including eating [12, 21, 22], 
dressing [16-20], and hygiene  [118, 119] assistance. CMU h as introduced physics simulation 
frameworks [18], including Assistive Gym [44], that enable pretraining and evaluation of assistive 
robot control models. CMU has demonstrated the use of robot learning in simulation to train real-
world robots to assist with dressing. [16, 17, 20] CMU introduced Robogen [45], a framework for 
generating diverse physics simulation environments via generative large-language models, which 
will interface with RAMMS for generating diverse environments for training and testing control 
models for RAMMP. CMU has introduced wearable interfaces and shared control methods for 
PWD to control mobile manipulators in homes. [46, 47, 120] CMU created new sensing modalities 
for robot end effectors enabling advanced perception and manipulation capabilities including near-
infrared spectrometry to infer object material properties [23, 111, 112] , capacitive proximity 
sensing for sensing the human body and nearby objects and multimodal force, vibration, and 
temperature sensors. [48, 118] NEU has experience leading research on functional assistive robot 
platforms, including robotic PMD  [121], and has advanced the field of robot navigation. [122] 

--- Page 27 ---
   
 
27 
 
NEU introduced deep neural network architectures to perform terrain classification  [25] and 
occupancy voxel detection [26] using on-board sensors, such as stereo cameras and lidar. NEU has 
developed probabilistic motion models for mobile robots to predict motion dynamics of off -road 
terrains under constantly evolving conditions . [27, 28]  NEU has demonstrated effective motion 
planning frameworks to “negotiate” obstacles given affordances  [123], e.g., can the robot’s 
manipulator “lift” the object. Modern reinforcement learning approaches for collision avoidance 
in dynamic environments have been explored. [124] NEU established a clustering model to infer 
human intent based on environment state and user input commands. M odel cluster state 
observations were translated into low-level PMD maneuvers, which were then probabilistically 
reasoned to recognize operator’s intended maneuver . [125] NEU has created novel augmented 
reality (AR) interfaces to provide user feedback during robotic PMD  navigation. [42, 43]  AR 
headsets were particularly useful due to their increased sense of presence and engagement over 
monitors, projectors, or other feedback modalities, such as haptic interfaces. By revealing the 
internal decision-making of the underlying shared autonomy of the platform, a “transparent” user-
PMD interaction was established. Cornell has shown feasible approaches for robot-assisted eating, 
which has resulted in characterizing human strategies for bite acquisition [49], multimodal sensing 
and perception for bite acquisition [50-58], bite transfer [59-62], and preliminary evaluation with 
stakeholders. [62-64] Cornell developed and released the first version of a user -centric robotic 
caregiving simulation world, RcareWorld [65] Purdue brings expertise in R&D of M&M for PWD, 
with a particular focus on transportation solutions. P urdue involvement in the Inclusive Design 
Challenge (IDC) hosted by the US Department of Transportation (DOT) resulted in a first -place 
victory. [126] This competition aimed to foster accessible design solutions for Autonomous 
Vehicles (A Vs) to enhance A V access for PWD, promote interdisciplinary collaborations, spur 
innovation in transportation technologies, and integrate insights from PWD , researchers, 
advocates, and entrepreneurs.  Purdue has investigated control modalities including speech and 
gesture recognition, keyboard, joystick, and haptic controllers and  employing semi-autonomous 
control algorithms utilizing computer vision. [98, 99] AI models have been employed to streamline 
task completion reducing time, movement requirements, and cognitive load. [127] ATDev was 
founded on the principle of developing AT to enable independence for PWD. ATDev’s first 
product, Reflex, is a Class II medical device. Reflex is an exoskeleton that provides at -home 
rehabilitation for people with knee injury and/or surgery. ATDev has developed its first proof-of-
concept PMD called  Quest. Quest includes PSF , integrated ARM from Kinova, and onboard 
computer and display all operable via a head switch and chin joystick. K inova is a pioneering 
company with a history in driving innovation and technological advancement in robotics. Kinova 
is dedicated to trans forming AT solutions that empower PWD . K inova’s ARM and smart 
manipulators demonstrate commitment to innovation, offering versatile and reliable solutions  
[128]. LUCI created the first and only commercial smart technology accessory for PMD. LUCI is 
designed to give users  a safer and more confident driving experience. LUCI’s advanced driver 
assistance prevents PMD tips, collisions, and falls before they happen, thanks to a platform which 
helps the PMD “see” its environment and respond to steering input from the user. LUCI is an after-
market accessory that adds sensors, computers, and connectivity to PMD offering active collision 
avoidance, drop-off, and tip protection. LUCI is currently in use by hundreds of PMD users in 40 
states. LUCI users have driven over 16,000 miles with no safety failures. LUCI’s predictive ground 

--- Page 28 ---
   
 
28 
 
detection is one of the only commercial products  in unmapped spaces at speed. LUCI’s drop-off 
protection works at speeds > 3.5 mph, checking the surrounding ground 10 times per second  
working both indoors and outdoors. 
S3 - F - Security Management Approach 
The RAMMP project will employ a multi-layered security framework encompassing both physical 
and digital security protocols, aligned with industry best practices and standards. Expertise in 
information system certification will be leveraged to ensure adherence to rel evant regulatory 
frameworks such as NIST SP 800- 171 or DoD RMF. Compliance with program protection 
planning guidelines will be prioritized to safeguard critical technology and IP  assets from 
unauthorized disclosur e. The RAMMP project will ensure that all s ubcontractors and partners 
adhere to security requirements through the execution of comprehensive IP agreements, licenses, 
and non-disclosure agreements. Clear guidelines and protocols will be established for handling 
proprietary or participant -identifiable information, and performing work at different 
confidentiality levels, ensuring consistency and compliance across project activities and sites. The 
RAMMP project's security management architecture will combine proactive measures, testing, and 
compliance frameworks to safeguard sensitive information and ensure the integrity of the system. 
LUCI, K inova, and AT Dev have in place rigorous  systems with procedures to comply with 
regulations in terms of privacy, security, and data/user protection. Their management are 
committed to the quality and the safety of products. U nder the guidance of 21 CFR Part 820 
subparts A through D, we will establish quality management system (QMS) procedures for 
Document Control, Design Control, and Software Development. All staff  are expected to read, 
follow, and implement the procedures of the QMS. Work completed for this grant will be managed 
through these existing, robust processes. No access to classified information is anticipated as part 
of this project. Access control to company data and software will be  protected to ensure and 
maintain data security, integrity, and protection of confidential information. Public data will be  
excluded from the scope of this procedure. LUCI , K inova, and ATDev facilities are access 
controlled and monitored with entrance cameras. Proprietary data will be stored per company QMS 
guidelines which involve  access management and backup. All software development wll be  
version controlled using git, backed up, and developed per QMS guidelines. Open-source software 
contributions will be added to the LUCI Mobility open SDK under an Apache 2.0 license. LUCI, 
ATDev, and Kinova have in place procedures for supplier approval, software validation and backup 
matrix to ensure the backup process is secure and efficient and meets business requirements, to 
carry out verification of backups according to the established schedule, have any bac kup service 
provider approved before implementation. The partner universities host encrypted networks for 
storage. Participant data will be anonymized for all private health information that university team 
members collect. To maintain anonymity, each participant will be assigned a number and will be 
referred to as participant #X. No link will exist between consent forms and data. Only authorized 
members will have access to view identifiable data. P articipant data will be stored in a private 
secured storage drive. Participant consent forms will be stored in a locked location on university 
property. Participants contact information and personal identifiers in the consent forms will not be 
referenced in any of publicati ons or the dissemination of research data and/or results. Data that 
does not reveal personal details, such as collected human trajectories, will be made accessible to 
other researchers contingent on Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. Once a citation can be 

--- Page 29 ---
   
 
29 
 
produced (e.g., an arXiv article or an accepted data paper), these data will be available freely for 
download from an online data repository or laboratory websites. Data that cannot be anonymized, 
or that runs the risk of identifying participants (such as audio and video recordings), will be made 
available to researchers through data -sharing agreements that protect participant privacy. D ata 
sharing will only be  conducted with IRB approval . All data collection will be contingent on 
receiving the written informed consent. Participants may  be given the opportunity to provide 
permission for their data to be used in an identifiable fashion (for example, including an image of 
them in a publication). This permission will be optional, and data will only be used in an 
identifiable way from participants who explicitly provide approval. 
S3 - G - Description of Facilities 
Pitt: The Human Engineering Research Laboratories (HERL) has over 27,000 sq. feet of office 
and laboratory space consisting of seven coordinated laboratories: The Machine Shop and Rapid 
Prototyping Laboratory  contains a wide variety of manual and Computer Numerical Control 
(CNC) machines capable of cutting and shaping metal, plastic , and 3d printing capabilities for 
rapid prototyping. The Technical Computing Laboratory includes Computer Aided Design (CAD) 
software, CNC machine code with Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) software and  CNC 
rapid prototyping machines. The Testing Labor atory is set up to perform many of the RESNA 
standards tests for the RAMMP prototype. HERL is frequently contacted by mobility device 
manufacturers to perform tests required by regulatory agencies. HERL is a leader  in the 
development of standards for assistive devices. 4) The Electronics Laboratory is fully equipped to 
support the hardware and software development of RAMMP, including power management and 
rapid electronics design and fabrication of PCBs for data collection, signal processing, and 
hardware-to-hardware communication. Part of the lab consists of electronics prototyping and 
debugging stations which are equipped with oscilloscopes, meters, power supplies, soldering irons, 
and function generators. ATDev: AT Dev’s engineering and manufacturing facility occupies 2000 
square feet, the space includes the 3D printers, PCB reflow oven, CNC mills, machining tools, 
electrical prototyping equipment, among others. Kinova: Kinova’s engineering and manufacturing 
facility occupies 53,000  square feet  including: Engineering test  facility with validation , and 
verification tools, Camera room production & V&V , 24/7 surveillance and security. Production & 
store, quality control team, l ogistic team, c amera test rooms, administrative & finance team, 
marketing & HR team, 3D printers, printer/copier system, m achining tools, prototyping and test 
equipment, locked storage, 24/7 surveillance, and security. Service technicians & field technicians, 
assistive training, technical training and demo room, assistive after-sales service room, production, 
3 x prototyping rooms, sandbox, and test room. Engineering offices and test space. LUCI: LUCI’s 
R&D facility is a 9,000+ square-foot mixture of office, lab, and warehouse space dedicated to the 
development of AT. The following lab facilities are available: Wheelchair Test Track:  
Indoor/outdoor test track includes a variety of flooring types, narrow hallways, doorways, 
simulated elevators, and bathroom as well as lighting and furniture. Ramps and steps are included. 
It allows for simulated use in a wide variety of environments without leaving the facility.  The 
Ferdinand tilt table, custom designed and built by LUCI, is capable of tilting wheelchairs in pitch 
and roll up to 20-degrees and can support weights up to 500 lbs. LUCI’s test range is a wide, open 
area with high ceiling that can be used to test and qualify sensors of various types. Electronics 
Lab: Fully equipped electronics lab for LUCI electronic systems. In-house Prototyping Equipment: 

--- Page 30 ---
   
 
30 
 
While most prototyping is sent to outside vendors, in-house 3D printing capability and a 3-axis X-
Carve mill. LUCI has a stable of > 25 PMD and at least one sample of each of the major wheelchair 
cushion types for testing. LUCI has  robust data collection capabilities due to existing IoT 
infrastructure and cloud computing resources which are built to collect anonymized data for 
analysis. NEU: The Institute for Experiential Robotics (IER) is primarily housed in NEU’s EXP 
building. IER: Lab space is comprised of over 6100 square feet and an additional  >4458 square 
foot high bay. Other spaces include a machine shop, drone cage, and > 300 square feet of open test 
space and a smart home. IER maintains a 500 square foot test area for ARM testing. NUHome is a 
smart home environment. There are a variety of commercially available products within this 
testbed. The smart environment is composed of proximity sensors, pressure sensors, motion 
detection sensors for activity monitoring, actuator modules for interacting with doors, windows, 
lights, and electronic devices, human- interfaces as personal assistants, and cameras for fall -
detection.  CMU: T he Robotic Caregiving and Human Interaction (RCHI) lab specializes in 
human-robot studies with an emphasis on human- centric caregiving  with > 750 sq. ft., has an 
actuated hospital ICU bed, medical manikins, PMD , 3D printers, electronics workstations for 
sensor development, several mobile manipulators, and access to multiple ARM. The lab has 
multiple computers for running massively parallel simulations with high CPU core and GPU 
counts. The lab has dedicated space for conducting human- robot studies. The Tech Spark facility 
is a maker space lab equipped for design and fabrication of custom electronics and mechanical 
devices and houses a simulation cluster. The space includes robotic manipulators, and small and 
human-sized mobile robots; an enclosed drone area; a smart home area with IoT, motion capture, 
and AR and VR equipment; access to cloud computing and data sets; and GPUs for machine 
learning, natural language processing, and computer vision. C ornell: 
The EmPRISE Lab, a 924 
sq. ft R&D space dedicated to the development of algorithms, robotic experiments, and evaluations 
with end-users. The EmPRISE lab has equipment to perform the proposed manipulation tasks 
including Kinova Gen-3 robot ARMs, PMD, and large body manikins. The lab is equipped with 
motion capture. Adjacent to the lab is 2400 sq. ft. of space for autonomous systems research, which 
houses a suite of robots, different depth-stereo sensors cameras and an electronics bench. There is 
a fabrication shop to design, manufacture, assemble, and maintain robotic prototypes and research 
robots, and 300 sq. ft. human- robot interaction experimental space. Computing Resources. The 
EmPRISE lab has access to Cornell’s G2 cluster. The lab owns powerful systems for interfacing 
with robots with NVIDIA GeFORCE RTX 3090 and AMD Ryzen. Purdue: T he Center for 
Inclusive Design (CID) includes The Efficient, Accessible and Safe Interaction in a Real Integrated 
Design Environment for Riders with disabilities (EASI RIDER)  test autonomous vehicle (A V) 
platform to assess interaction in a standard-sized A V with accessibility features instrumented with 
multi-modal cameras, real -time interior and exterior video monitoring and remote 
videoconferencing. Institute for Accessible Science (IAS) Lab in Discovery Park is a 40- acre 
research park on Purdue’s campus, housing the IAS Lab with access to prototyping facilities. The 
IAS Lab is ~ 1,000 sq. ft. dedicated to fabricating and testing AT. The lab is equipped with 
mechanical and electrical shop facilities for building custom mechatronics.  
S3 - H – Proposal Enhancing Support 
Teaming Agreements will delineate the roles, responsibilities, and expectations for clarity and 
alignment. These agreements will promote effective communication, coordination, and synergy. 

--- Page 31 ---
   
 
31 
 
Data-Sharing Agreements will form ensure responsible data management practices. They will 
outline protocols for collecting, storing, and disseminating research data while upholding 
confidentiality, security, and ethical considerations. Data Storage Procedures will establish 
standardized protocols for securely storing and managing R&D  data. Storage infrastructure and 
encryption technologies procedures will safeguard against data loss, corruption, and unauthorized 
access. IP and Royalty Sharing Agreements will provide a framework for recognizing and 
protecting intellectual contributions. These agreements will delineate ownership rights, licensing 
arrangements, and revenue-sharing mechanisms. Training Agreements encompass a spectrum of 
educational initiatives aimed at enhancing professional development and ethical conduct. Central 
to these agreements is the CITI training on Responsible Conduct of Research, and Technology, 
Ethics, and Regulations.  Materials Transfer Agreements will facilitate the sharing and define 
ownership of assets. I mplementation of these agreements and procedures will foster a culture of 
collaboration, integrity, and innovation, ensuring success and sustainability. 
S3 - I - Milestone Costs and Accomplishments 
Phases Global 
Tasks Task/Milestone Title Start 
Qtr 
End 
Qtr Deliverable  Total Cumulative 
Total 
1 1 Research Conduct Approvals and Collaborative 
Agreements 1 6 Milestone Report $1,665,285  $1,665,285  
1 2 Executed Contracts and Subaward Agreements 
in Place 1 1 Milestone Report $362,708  $2,027,992  
1 3 Stakeholder Needs Clarification and Validation 1 2 Milestone Report $472,668  $2,500,661  
1 4 Establishment of Performance Metrics 1 4 Milestone Report $921,669  $3,422,329  
1 5 Design and System Requirement Definition  1 6 Milestone Report $3,268,387  $6,690,716  
1 6 Finalized Specifications and Bill of Materials 2 6 Milestone Report $2,252,401  $8,943,118  
2 7 Algorithm Performance Integration for ADL 4 18 Milestone Report $5,912,173  $14,855,290  
2 8 Initial Proof-of-Concept (TRL3) 4 16 Demonstration $1,705,885  $16,561,175  
2 9 Hardware Systems Integration Completed 5 16 Milestone Report $2,306,802  $18,867,977  
2 10 Systems Verification and Validation Process 4 14 Milestone Report $2,779,471  $21,647,448  
2 11 Feasibility Demonstration (Alpha Version - 
TRL4) 6 9 Demonstration $1,261,369  $22,908,817  
3 12 Expert User Evaluation and Validation Phase 10 12 Milestone Report $589,006  $23,497,823  
3 13 Efficacy Test Results (Beta Version - TRL5) 9 15 Milestone Report $1,408,326  $24,906,149  
3 14 Completion of CLOUT and Standards Testing 15 16 Milestone Report $838,011  $25,744,161  
3 15 Hardware and Software Refinement 
Implementation 4 18 Milestone Report $8,845,488  $34,589,648  
3 16 Minimum Viable Product (MVP - TRL6) for 
Deployment 11 14 Demonstration $894,381  $35,484,029  
3 17 Deployment of RAMMP to Core Team 
Members 15 18 Milestone Report $1,571,057  $37,055,086  
3 18 Results of Effectiveness Testing 16 18 Milestone Report $2,357,239  $39,412,325  
3 19 Community Engagement Presentation 13 18 Demonstration $842,396  $40,254,722  
4 20 Knowledge Translation and Technology 
Transfer Processes 19 20 Milestone Report $1,455,494  $41,710,215  

--- Page 32 ---
   
 
32 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. D. Mountain, C. Smith, and R. L. Kirby, "Are wheelchair- skills assessment and 
training relevant for long-standing wheelchair users? Two case reports," Disability and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 230-233, 2010. 
[2] B. Daveler, B. Salatin, G. G. Grindle, and J. Candiotti, "Participatory design and 
validation of mobility enhancement robotic wheelchair," Journal of rehabilitation 
research and development, vol. 52, no. 6, p. 739, 2015. 
[3] H. Xiang, A. Chany, and G. A. Smith, "Wheelchair related injuries treated in US 
emergency departments," Injury prevention, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 8-11, 2006. 
[4] B. Salatin, "Electric powered wheelchair driving outdoors: The identification of driving 
obstacles & strategies and the development of an advanced controller," University of 
Pittsburgh, 2011.  
[5] A. R. Meyers, J. J. Anderson, D. R. Miller, K. Shipp, and H. Hoenig, "Barriers, 
facilitators, and access for wheelchair users: sbstantive and methodologic lessons from a 
pilot study of environmental effects," Social science & medicine, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1435-
1446, 2002. 
[6] S. Nakajima, "A new personal mobility vehicle for daily life: improvements on a new RT-
mover that enable greater mobility are showcased at the cybathlon," IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 37-48, 2017. 
[7] H. Uustal and J. L. Minkel, "Study of the Independence IBOT 3000 Mobility System: an 
innovative power mobility device, during use in community environments," Archives of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 2002-2010, 2004. 
[8] I. Laffont  et al., "Evaluation of a stair-climbing power wheelchair in 25 people with 
tetraplegia," Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 89, no. 10, pp. 1958-
1964, 2008. 
[9] S. Sivakanthan et al. , "Usability evaluation of attitude control for a robotic wheelchair for 
tip mitigation in outdoor environments," Medical engineering & physics, vol. 82, pp. 86-
96, 2020. 
[10] D.-J. Kim et al., "How autonomy impacts performance and satisfaction: Results from a 
study with spinal cord injured subjects using an assistive robot," IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 2-14, 
2011. 
[11] J. Jutai and H. Day, "Psychosocial impact of assistive devices scale (PIADS)," 
Technology and Disability, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 107-111, 2002. 
[12] Y . Wang et al., "Robogen: Towards unleashing infinite data for automated robot learning 
via generative simulation," arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01455, 2023. 
[13] "National Science Foundation (NSF) Convergence Accelerator- Track H project: 
Mobility Independence through Accelerated Wheelchair Intelligence." U.S. National 
Science Foundation. 
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2345174&HistoricalAwards=fa
lse (accessed. 
[14]  B. K. Styler, W. Deng, R. Simmons, H. Admoni, R. Cooper, and D. Ding, "Exploring 
Control Authority Preferences in Robotic Arm Assistance for Power Wheelchair Users," 
in Actuators, 2024, vol. 13, no. 3: MDPI, p. 104.  
[15] C.-S. Chung, H. Wang, M. J. Hannan, D. Ding, A. R. Kelleher, and R. A. Cooper, "Task-
oriented performance evaluation for assistive robotic manipulators: a pilot study," 

--- Page 33 ---
   
 
33 
 
American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 395-407, 
2017. 
[16]  Z. Erickson, S. Chernova, and C. C. Kemp, "Semi-supervised haptic material recognition 
for robots using generative adversarial networks," in Conference on Robot Learning, 
2017: PMLR, pp. 157-166.  
[17]  Z. Erickson, H. M. Clever, V . Gangaram, G. Turk, C. K. Liu, and C. C. Kemp, 
"Multidimensional capacitive sensing for robot-assisted dressing and bathing," in 2019 
IEEE 16th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2019: IEEE, 
pp. 224-231.  
[18]  D. Park, H. Kim, Y . Hoshi, Z. Erickson, A. Kapusta, and C. C. Kemp, "A multimodal 
execution monitor with anomaly classification for robot-assisted feeding," in 2017 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017: 
IEEE, pp. 5406-5413.  
[19] Z. Erickson et al. , "Characterizing multidimensional capacitive servoing for physical 
human–robot interaction," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 357-372, 
2022. 
[20]  Y . Ding, H. Zhang, and U. Thomas, "Capacitive proximity sensor skin for contactless 
material detection," in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots 
and Systems (IROS), 2018: IEEE, pp. 7179-7184.  
[21] C. Chi  et al., "Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion," arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2303.04137, 2023. 
[22] Y . Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu, "3D diffusion policy," arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2403.03954, 2024. 
[23]  R. Ye  et al., "Rcare world: A human-centric simulation world for caregiving robots," in 
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
2022: IEEE, pp. 33-40.  
[24] S. Udupa, V . R. Kamat, and C. C. Menassa, "Shared autonomy in assistive mobile robots: 
a review," Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 827-
848, 2023. 
[25]  M. Wang, R. Luo, A. Ö. Önol, and T. Padir, "Affordance-based mobile robot navigation 
among movable obstacles," in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2020: IEEE, pp. 2734-2740.  
[26]  N. Ü. Akmandor, H. Li, G. Lvov, E. Dusel, and T. Padir, "Deep reinforcement learning 
based robot navigation in dynamic environments using occupancy values of motion 
primitives," in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS), 2022: IEEE, pp. 11687-11694.  
[27]  A. Trivedi, S. Bazzi, M. Zolotas, and T. Padır, "Probabilistic dynamic modeling and 
control for skid-steered mobile robots in off-road environments," in 2023 IEEE 
International Conference on Assured Autonomy (ICAA), 2023: IEEE, pp. 57-60.  
[28]  A. Trivedi, M. Zolotas, A. Abbas, S. Prajapati, S. Bazzi, and T. Padır, "Probabilistic 
Dynamic Modeling and Control for Skid-Steered Mobile Robots in Off-Road 
Environments," in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2024: 
IEEE.  
[29] NVivo (Version 12). (2017). [Online]. Available: www.lumivero.com
 

--- Page 34 ---
   
 
34 
 
[30] "Clinical Limits of Use Tool (CLOUT) for Wheeled mobility devices." 
www.patientsafety.va.gov/docs/CLOUTWheeledMobilityDevicesv1.pdf (accessed March 
23, 2024). 
[31] L. Harris-Kojetin et al., "Long-term care providers and services users in the United 
States: data from the National Study of Long-Term Care Providers, 2013-2014,"  Vital & 
health statistics. Series 3, Analytical and epidemiological studies, no. 38, pp. 10-12, 
2016. 
[32] M. W. Brault. "Americans with disabilities, 2010: Household economic studies." US 
Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2012/demo/p70-131.html
 
(accessed. 
[33] B. E. Dicianno and E. Tovey, "Power mobility device provision: understanding Medicare 
guidelines and advocating for clients," Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, 
vol. 88, no. 6, pp. 807-816, 2007. 
[34] S. Bennett, R. Lee Kirby, S. Bennett, R. Lee Kirby, and B. Macdonald, "Wheelchair 
accessibility: Descriptive survey of curb ramps in an urban area," Disability and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 17-23, 2009. 
[35] K. M. Tsui, D.-J. Kim, A. Behal, D. Kontak, and H. A. Yanco, "“I want that”: Human- in-
the-loop control of a wheelchair-mounted robotic arm," Applied Bionics and 
Biomechanics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 127-147, 2011. 
[36]  M. Pascher, A. Baumeister, S. Schneegass, B. Klein, and J. Gerken, "Recommendations 
for the Development of a Robotic Drinking and Eating Aid-An Ethnographic Study," in 
Human-Computer Interaction–INTERACT 2021: 18th IFIP TC 13 International 
Conference, Bari, Italy, August 30–September 3, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 18, 2021: 
Springer, pp. 331-351.  
[37] S. Allin, E. Eckel, H. Markham, and B. R. Brewer, "Recent trends in the development and 
evaluation of assistive robotic manipulation devices," Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation Clinics, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 59-77, 2010. 
[38] C. A. Schoenborn and K. M. Heyman, "Health characteristics of adults aged 55 years and 
over: United States, 2004–2007," Natl Health Stat Report, vol. 16, pp. 1-31, 2009. 
[39] J. L. Candiotti  et al., "Usability evaluation of a novel robotic power wheelchair for indoor 
and outdoor navigation," Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 100, no. 
4, pp. 627-637, 2019. 
[40]  M. Zolotas and Y . Demiris, "Disentangled sequence clustering for human intention 
inference," in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS), 2022: IEEE, pp. 9814-9820.  
[41]  R. Luo, D. Sinyukov, and T. Padir, "Novelti 2.0: Enhanced Assistive Robot Navigation 
with Low Throughput Interfaces," in Proceedings of the 14th PErvasive Technologies 
Related to Assistive Environments Conference, 2021, pp. 123-131.  
[42]  M. Zolotas, J. Elsdon, and Y . Demiris, "Head-mounted augmented reality for explainable 
robotic wheelchair assistance," in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018: IEEE, pp. 1823-1829.  
[43]  M. Zolotas and Y . Demiris, "Towards explainable shared control using augmented 
reality," in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems 
(IROS), 2019: IEEE, pp. 3020-3026.  

--- Page 35 ---
   
 
35 
 
[44] C.-S. Chung, B. Styler, E. Wang, and D. Ding, "Robotic Assistance in action: Examining 
control methods for long-term owners of wheelchair-mounted robotic arms," Assistive 
Technology, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 85-86, 2024. 
[45]  E. Wang, B. Styler, and D. Ding, "Autonomous or Manual Control? Qualitative Analysis 
of Control Perceptions From Current Robotic Arm Owners," in 2023 32nd IEEE 
International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 
2023: IEEE, pp. 449-455.  
[46]  L. V . Herlant, R. M. Holladay, and S. S. Srinivasa, "Assistive teleoperation of robot arms 
via automatic time-optimal mode switching," in 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2016: IEEE, pp. 35-42.  
[47]  A. Padmanabha  et al., "Independence in the Home: A Wearable Interface for a Person 
with Quadriplegia to Teleoperate a Mobile Manipulator," in Proceedings of the 2024 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, 2024, pp. 542-551.  
[48] Y . Wang, Z. Sun, Z. Erickson, and D. Held, "One policy to dress them all: Learning to 
dress people with diverse poses and garments," arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12372, 2023. 
[49] "Meal Buddy." Performance Health. 
https://www.performancehealth.com/meal-buddy-
systems (accessed. 
[50] "The Mealtime Partner Dining System." Mealtime Partners. 
https://mealtimepartners.com/
 (accessed. 
[51] "Automating My Spoon through image processing." Intelligent System Lab. 
https://www.secom.co.jp/isl/e2/research/mw/report04/ (accessed. 
[52] "Obi." Obi. https://meetobi.com/  (accessed. 
[53] "Winsford Feeder." North Coast Medical. https://www.ncmedical.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/Winsford-Broch_web_0611.pdf (accessed. 
[54] "Meal-Mate." 
https://www.made2aid.co.uk/productprofile?productId=8&company=RBF%20Healthcare
&product=Meal-Mate (accessed. 
[55] "Beeson Automaddak Feeder (MODEL H74501)." Network of Care. 
https://blair.pa.networkofcare.org/veterans/assistive/detail.aspx?id=18902&cid=797&cn=
Feeders&org= (accessed. 
[56] "Bestic, the Eating Assistance Device." Virtual Expo Group. 
https://trends.medicalexpo.com/medicalexpo-e-magazine/project-118905-423917.html 
(accessed. 
[57] "Neater Eater Robotic Demo Video." Neater Solutions. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEKahm7oCC0 (accessed. 
[58]  A. Candeias, T. Rhodes, M. Marques, and M. Veloso, "Vision augmented robot feeding," 
in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, 
2018.  
[59] H. Higa, K. Kurisu, and H. Uehara, "A vision-based assistive robotic arm for people with 
severe disabilities," Transactions on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, 
no. 4, pp. 12-23, 2014. 
[60] A. Jardón, C. A. Monje, and C. Balaguer, "Functional evaluation of ASIBOT: A new 
approach on portable robotic system for disabled people," Applied Bionics and 
Biomechanics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 85-97, 2012. 

--- Page 36 ---
   
 
36 
 
[61] S. Javdani, H. Admoni, S. Pellegrinelli, S. S. Srinivasa, and J. A. Bagnell, "Shared 
autonomy via hindsight optimization for teleoperation and teaming," The International 
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 717-742, 2018. 
[62] P. Lopes  et al. " iCraft-eye-controlled robotic feeding arm technology." 
https://ece.northeastern.edu/personal/meleis/icraft.pdf (accessed. 
[63]  Y . Ohshima, Y . Kobayashi, T. Kaneko, A. Yamashita, and H. Asama, "Meal support 
system with spoon using laser range finder and manipulator," in 2013 IEEE workshop on 
robot vision (WORV), 2013: IEEE, pp. 82-87.  
[64]  C. J. Perera, T. D. Lalitharatne, and K. Kiguchi, "EEG-controlled meal assistance robot 
with camera-based automatic mouth position tracking and mouth open detection," in 
2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), 2017: IEEE, pp. 
1760-1765.  
[65]  C. J. Perera, I. Naotunna, C. Sadaruwan, R. A. R. C. Gopura, and T. D. Lalitharatne, 
"SSVEP based BMI for a meal assistance robot," in 2016 IEEE International Conference 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2016: IEEE, pp. 002295-002300.  
[66]  S. Schröer  et al., "An autonomous robotic assistant for drinking," in 2015 IEEE 
international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), 2015: IEEE, pp. 6482-
6487.  
[67] W.-K. Song and J. Kim, "Novel assistive robot for self-feeding," Robotic Systems-
Applications, Control and Programming, pp. 43-60, 2012. 
[68]  Y . Takahashi and S. Suzukawa, "Easy human interface for severely handicapped persons 
and application for eating assist robot," in 2006 IEEE international conference on 
mechatronics, 2006: IEEE, pp. 225-229.  
[69] K. Tanaka, S. Mu, and S. Nakashima, "Meal-assistance robot using ultrasonic motor with 
eye interface," International Journal of Automation Technology, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 186-
192, 2014. 
[70]  M. Topping, H. Heck, G. Bolmsjo, and D. Weightman, "The development of RAIL 
(robotic aid to independent living)," in Proceedings of the third TIDE Congress, 1998.  
[71] M. J. Topping and J. K. Smith, "The development of handy 1. A robotic system to assist 
the severely disabled," Technology and Disability, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 95-105, 1999. 
[72]  M. Vila Abad, G. Canal, and G. Alenyà, "Towards safety in physically assistive robots: 
eating assistance," in IROS Workshop on Robots for Assisted Living, 2018, pp. 1-4.  
[73]  A. Yamazaki and R. Masuda, "Autonomous foods handling by chopsticks for meal 
assistant robot," in ROBOTIK 2012; 7th German Conference on Robotics, 2012: VDE, 
pp. 1-6.  
[74]  A. Yamazaki and R. Masuda, "Various foods handling movement of chopstick-equipped 
meal assistant robot and there evaluation," in Social Robotics: 4th International 
Conference, ICSR 2012, Chengdu, China, October 29-31, 2012. Proceedings 4, 2012: 
Springer, pp. 158-167.  
[75] T. Bhattacharjee, G. Lee, H. Song, and S. S. Srinivasa, "Towards robotic feeding: Role of 
haptics in fork-based food manipulation," IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, 
no. 2, pp. 1485-1492, 2019. 
[76] D. Park, Y . K. Kim, Z. M. Erickson, and C. C. Kemp, "Towards assistive feeding with a 
general-purpose mobile manipulator," arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07996, 2016. 

--- Page 37 ---
   
 
37 
 
[77]  T. Rhodes and M. Veloso, "Robot-driven trajectory improvement for feeding tasks," in 
2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
2018: IEEE, pp. 2991-2996.  
[78]  R. M. Alqasemi, E. J. McCaffrey, K. D. Edwards, and R. V . Dubey, "Wheelchair-
mounted robotic arms: Analysis, evaluation and development," in Proceedings, 2005 
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics., 2005: 
IEEE, pp. 1164-1169.  
[79] Z. Bien et al., "Integration of a rehabilitation robotic system (KARES II) with human-
friendly man-machine interaction units," Autonomous robots, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 165-191, 
2004. 
[80]  H. Eftring and K. Boschian, "Technical results from manus user trials," in Proc. ICORR, 
1999, vol. 99: Citeseer, pp. 136-141.  
[81] M. Evans, "Magpie: It's development and evaluation.," 1991.  
[82]  D. Gallenberger, T. Bhattacharjee, Y . Kim, and S. S. Srinivasa, "Transfer depends on 
acquisition: Analyzing manipulation strategies for robotic feeding," in 2019 14th 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2019: IEEE, 
pp. 267-276.  
[83]  M. Hillman and A. Gammie, "The Bath institute of medical engineering assistive robot," 
in Proc. ICORR, 1994, vol. 94, pp. 211-212.  
[84]  V . Maheu, P. S. Archambault, J. Frappier, and F. Routhier, "Evaluation of the JACO 
robotic arm: Clinico-economic study for powered wheelchair users with upper-extremity 
disabilities," in 2011 IEEE international conference on rehabilitation robotics, 2011: 
IEEE, pp. 1-5.  
[85] S. W. Brose et al., "The role of assistive robotics in the lives of persons with disability," 
American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 509-521, 
2010. 
[86] V . Kumar, T. Rahman, and V . Krovi, "Assistive devices for people with motor 
disabilities," Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, vol. 22, 
1997. 
[87]  I. Naotunna, C. J. Perera, C. Sandaruwan, R. Gopura, and T. D. Lalitharatne, "Meal 
assistance robots: A review on current status, challenges and future directions," in 2015 
IEEE/SICE international symposium on system integration (SII), 2015: IEEE, pp. 211-
216.  
[88]  N. Tejima, "Evaluation of rehabilitation robots for eating," in Proceedings 5th IEEE 
International Workshop on Robot and Human Communication. RO-MAN'96 TSUKUBA, 
1996: IEEE, pp. 118-120.  
[89] "Liftward Steady, Liftware Level." Verily. https://www.liftware.com/
 (accessed. 
[90]  E. Ohara, K. i. Yano, S. Horihata, T. Aoki, and Y . Nishimoto, "Tremor suppression 
control of meal-assist robot with adaptive filter," in 2009 IEEE International Conference 
on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2009: IEEE, pp. 498-503.  
[91] A. Pathak, J. A. Redmond, M. Allen, and K. L. Chou, "A noninvasive handheld assistive 
device to accommodate essential tremor: a pilot study," Movement Disorders, vol. 29, no. 
6, pp. 838-842, 2014. 
[92] "Jamie." Focal Meditech. https://www.focalmeditech.nl/en/content/jamie
 (accessed. 
[93] "Eating aid Nelson." Focal Meditech. https://www.focalmeditech.com/?s=nelson  
(accessed. 

--- Page 38 ---
   
 
38 
 
[94] L. A. Van der Heide, B. Van Ninhuijs, A. Bergsma, G. J. Gelderblom, D. J. Van Der Pijl, 
and L. P. De Witte, "An overview and categorization of dynamic arm supports for people 
with decreased arm function," Prosthetics and orthotics international, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 
287-302, 2014. 
[95] N. Ettehadi and A. Behal, "A learning from demonstration framework for implementation 
of a feeding task," Encyclopedia with Semantic Computing and Robotic Intelligence, vol. 
2, no. 01, p. 1850001, 2018. 
[96] L. Herlant, "Algorithms, Implementation, and Studies on Eating with a Shared Control 
Robot Arm," Carnegie Mellon University, USA, 2018.  
[97]  G. Canal, G. Alenyà, and C. Torras, "Personalization framework for adaptive robotic 
feeding assistance," in Social Robotics: 8th International Conference, ICSR 2016, Kansas 
City, MO, USA, November 1-3, 2016 Proceedings 8, 2016: Springer, pp. 22-31.  
[98] H. Jiang, T. Zhang, J. P. Wachs, and B. S. Duerstock, "Enhanced control of a wheelchair-
mounted robotic manipulator using 3-D vision and multimodal interaction," Computer 
Vision and Image Understanding, vol. 149, pp. 21-31, 2016. 
[99]  M. Marambe, M. Sanchez, J. P. Wachs, and B. S. Duerstock, "Comparison of 3D 
Joystick Control Modalities for a Robotic Manipulator," in RESNA 2022 Virtual 
Conference, 2022.  
[100]  M. Quigley et al., "ROS: an open-source Robot Operating System," in ICRA workshop 
on open source software, 2009, vol. 3, no. 3.2: Kobe, Japan, p. 5.  
[101] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette, and W. Woodall, "Robot Operating 
System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild," Science robotics, vol. 7, no. 66, p. 
eabm6074, 2022. 
[102] R. Bocchino, T. Canham, G. Watney, L. Reder, and J. Levison, "F Prime: an open-source 
framework for small-scale flight software systems," 2018. 
[103]  A. Dubey et al., "A software platform for fractionated spacecraft," in 2012 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, 2012: IEEE, pp. 1-20.  
[104]  A. Dubey, G. Karsai, A. Gokhale, W. Emfinger, and P. Kumar, "DREMS-OS: An 
operating system for managed distributed real-time embedded systems," in 2017 6th 
International Conference on Space Mission Challenges for Information Technology 
(SMC-IT), 2017: IEEE, pp. 114-119.  
[105] P. S. Kumar, W. Emfinger, G. Karsai, D. Watkins, B. Gasser, and A. Anilkumar, 
"ROSMOD: a toolsuite for modeling, generating, deploying, and managing distributed 
real-time component-based software using ROS," Electronics, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 53, 2016. 
[106]  J. Lilius and I. P. Paltor, "Formalising UML state machines for model checking," in 
International Conference on the Unified Modeling Language, 1999: Springer, pp. 430-
444.  
[107] V . Makoviychuk et al., "Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for 
robot learning," arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021. 
[108]  S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, "Airsim: High-fidelity visual and physical 
simulation for autonomous vehicles," in Field and Service Robotics: Results of the 11th 
International Conference, 2018: Springer, pp. 621-635.  
[109]  A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V . Koltun, "CARLA: An open urban 
driving simulator," in Conference on robot learning, 2017: PMLR, pp. 1-16.  

--- Page 39 ---
   
 
39 
 
[110]  N. Koenig and A. Howard, "Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open-source multi-
robot simulator," in 2004 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and 
systems (IROS)(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37566), 2004, vol. 3: Ieee, pp. 2149-2154.  
[111]  Z. Erickson, V . Gangaram, A. Kapusta, C. K. Liu, and C. C. Kemp, "Assistive gym: A 
physics simulation framework for assistive robotics," in 2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020: IEEE, pp. 10169-10176.  
[112] K. Puthuveetil, C. C. Kemp, and Z. Erickson, "Bodies uncovered: Learning to manipulate 
real blankets around people via physics simulations," IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1984-1991, 2022. 
[113] H. Wang et al., "Stability analysis of electrical powered wheelchair-mounted robotic-
assisted transfer device," Journal of rehabilitation research and development, vol. 51, no. 
5, pp. 761-774, 2014. 
[114]  H. Wang et al., "The Personal Mobility and Manipulation Appliance (PerMMA): A 
robotic wheelchair with advanced mobility and manipulation," in 2012 Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 
2012: IEEE, pp. 3324-3327.  
[115] R. A. Cooper et al., "Mobility Enhancement Wheelchair,"  Patent Appl. 17/145,926, 
2021.  
[116] S. A. Satpute et al., "Participatory Action Design and Engineering of Powered Personal 
Transfer System for Wheelchair Users: Initial Design and Assessment," Sensors, vol. 23, 
no. 12, p. 5540, 2023. 
[117] J. L. Candiotti, B. J. Daveler, S. Sivakanthan, G. G. Grindle, R. Cooper, and R. A. 
Cooper, "Curb negotiation with dynamic human–robotic wheelchair collaboration," IEEE 
transactions on human-machine systems, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 149-155, 2021. 
[118] R. C. Lyle, "A performance test for assessment of upper limb function in physical 
rehabilitation treatment and research," International journal of rehabilitation research, 
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 483-492, 1981. 
[119] N. Yozbatiran, L. Der-Yeghiaian, and S. C. Cramer, "A standardized approach to 
performing the action research arm test," Neurorehabilitation and neural repair, vol. 22, 
no. 1, pp. 78-90, 2008. 
[120] Z. Rashid, R. Pous, and C. S. Norrie, "An independent shopping experience for 
wheelchair users through augmented reality and RFID," Assistive Technology, vol. 31, no. 
1, pp. 9-18, 2019. 
[121] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodríguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardós, "Orb-slam3: 
An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam," IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1874-1890, 2021. 
[122] M. Wonsick and T. Padir, "A systematic review of virtual reality interfaces for controlling 
and interacting with robots," Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 24, p. 9051, 2020. 
[123] C. Mavrogiannis et al., "Core challenges of social robot navigation: A survey," ACM 
Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1-39, 2023. 
[124] D. A. Abbink et al., "A topology of shared control systems—finding common ground in 
diversity," IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 509-525, 
2018. 
[125] J. Leaman and H. M. La, "A comprehensive review of smart wheelchairs: past, present, 
and future," IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 486-499, 
2017. 

--- Page 40 ---
   
 
40 
 
[126] "U.S. Department of Transportation Announces Winners of its Inclusive Design 
Challenge." U.S. Department of Transportation. 
https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDOT/bulletins/325126b (accessed. 
[127] S. Pancholi, J. P. Wachs, and B. S. Duerstock, "Use of Artificial Intelligence Techniques 
to Assist Individuals with Physical Disabilities," Annual Review of Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 26, 2024. 
[128] A. Campeau-Lecours et al., "Kinova modular robot arms for service robotics 
applications," in Rapid Automation: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications: 
IGI global, 2019, pp. 693-719. 
 
